	The greatest technological changes have come whenever human beings decided to increase the concentration of their numbers.  Humans have utilized “Shatzbergian” technologies, like flint-blades, woven ropes, and sheltered dwellings for tens of thousands of years. These technologies certainly would have evolved without the evolution of cities, but I have found significant evidence that the advancement of technology has been greatest at civilizational turning-points. 
	As hunter gatherers, humans were reliant on certain tools and skills. The development of tools takes time, resources, and some sort of construction site. As a wandering society, the hunter-gatherers didn’t have a lot of free time or construction sites. Their energy was put into hunting and gathering, instead of resource procurement for technological advancement.   As such, technology like flint-blades, and art, evolved very slowly. When humans finally decided to settle down in one location, villagers were able to develop larger and more fragile creations , and there was an explosion of technological advancement. Pottery wasn’t developed until about 12,000 ago, when foragers finally settled in a plentiful area of southern Japan. Would pottery, the furnace, and connected technologies like the smelting of copper in Anatolia  have been possible without the creation of these small villages? It seems doubtful when one considers the lab needed to perform the activities mentioned, and the effort needed to source materials, especially metals. It also seems doubtful when one considers the length of time it took to develop furnaces capable of melting copper. While the smelters in Anatolia began working with copper around 5000 BCE, it wasn’t until the second century BCE that bellows were invented , which produced the heat necessary to melt copper. Would a human, occupied with daily migration and foraging had ever found the time to discover bellows? 
	Farming is another early technology developed in response to an increase in population density. It is important to note that advancements in farming technology occurred for other reasons besides an increasing population. Methods to increase production, and thus reduce the physical labor needed to farm, arose 12,000 years ago , and new methods would most certainly have been sought without the invention of large cities. I argue that once villages developed civilizations in which some members did not farm, an additional constraint was placed on crop/farm output. This constraint was resolved through technological advancements which in turn created a positive feedback loop on technology advancements. Not only were artifacts like axes and hoes developed to facilitate farming , the additional food created a caloric supply for a labor force, providing the workers necessary for technological advancement. The technology of manipulating waterways arose to create more productive fields. Dikes, channels, and reservoirs were created along the Yellow River while in Mexico farmers created chinampas. Chinampas were a truly remarkable technological feat which took advantage of the relationship between solid-soil and willow tree roots, i.e., utilized biotechnology.  
	Governments evolved as humans concentrated, and these governments were often the driving force behind technological change. In the fifth century BCE, Athenian democracy help elevate the social status of those with technical and craft skill . Even back then, technology was known to be essential to social stability . Even more consolidated forms of government brought focus to the advancement of technologies, especially those which revolved around social endeavors. In Authoritarian Technics, Mumford wrote, “activities that had been scattered, diversified…were united on a monumental scale”.  The problem of waste disposal was answered with the technology of sanitary sewers, with significant advancements coming from the Roman empire . As the Romans empire spread, intricate aqueducts were constructed, pushing the already existing water-way technologies developed for farming.  In China, in response its growing populations needs, hydraulic engineers concentrated their water-control on flooding issues.  Interesting that two societies, separate and facing different problems, found answers through similar technologies. In both cases, the effort of the government, a symbol of human-concentration, were paramount.
	To conclude, I would like to go back to the fifth century BCE. The very concept of technology was still so groundbreaking that Aristotle was not only trying to define these inventions (technology) but also define their role in society. I think this context of cognizance of the concept of technology, but ignorance of its definition, showcases my point; advancements in technology and civilization have been so intertwined that by the time deep-thinkers like Aristotle came around, there seemed too many technologies to apply a single definition to. Civilization and technology have developed in unison, regardless of geographical location or cultural context, both driving each other. 
Today, we live in a mechanized, digitized, accessible world. We are far more advanced then we were 20 years ago, let alone 200; yet modern society is nearly illiterate to the technologies which support it. Why does technology, a cornerstone of civilization, seem to exist outside of the human context? Part of the answer lies in the debates of the 18th and 19th centuries concerning the difference between science and art. The social changes surrounding these debates, and the solidifying of the engineer as a profession, created two new divisions of knowledge, the fine arts, and applied science. The division pushed the mechanical arts, the face of the Industrial Revolution and technology, away from art and into the realm of pure science, a world not intended for the average person.
	It was in the 18th century that encyclopedias were adopted by the public as reputable sources of knowledge,  and the era’s two best-known encyclopedias both offered updated definitions to science and art. The Cyclopedia; or, An Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences separated science and art on the basis that science used deductive reason, while art “encompassed knowledge that reason alone could not attain”. The major distinction was that art could be either good or evil, depending on the artist, while the work of a scientist was always of high-order, executed with Godly virtue . Artists, therefore had agency, while the artisan did not. The removal of societies agency to act on technology was removed at the root level, the artisan. The era’s other popular dictionary, the French Encyclopédie, divided the attributes of the artist and the artisan. Humanistic attributes, such as creativity and freedom were given to the artist, while the artisan was given the rules of technique and skill.  
	Ideas can be debated on-end by huddled scholars, but ideas become catalytic when the middle-class gets involved, and the middle-class theorists were also disparaging towards artisans. They felt that progression “in the useful arts”  via industrialization had the purpose of turning artisan work obsolete. Innovation was to be supplied by mechanization, not artisans. Thus, the medium of what we call technology was removed from artist’s toolbox and placed in the laboratory of the scientist. Artisans like the Birmingham rifle-makers  and the wool-workers in West of England  had their profession and knowledge taken from their homes and placed inside factories. The artisan’s craft-secrets became hidden from themselves, and society. 
	Collaborations of the time between men with scholarly knowledge, and those with practical knowledge, were blurring the lines between scientist and craftsman.  This diffusion between practice and theory resulted in the term applied science. Applied science was a social-balance disruptor, elevating the practitioner of science, the engineer, from its artisanal location. The academic branch of science, advocators of episteme, were threatened by the elevation of the engineer. Unfortunately for the theorists, engineered goods produced a strong benefit to society, and had been gaining social approval since Bacon. In order to maintain their elevated social position, protect their profession, and maybe get a little bit of that industrialization cash, natural philosophers “set themselves up as prophets…wherein the untutored artisan would be disciplined by the literate gentlemen” . 
	These natural philosophers aligned themselves with engineering’s products in order to keep themselves on a higher rung then the engineers. They also took credit for any creativity in the products, claiming that artisan progression was fueled by the application of prior discoveries in pure science.  Right when the works of applied science were taken from the home, the scientific community appropriated those works to maintain the social and professional superiority of theory to application. This one-two punch ensured that future “technologies” would have a scientific upbringing and removed the engineer, along with its creations and knowledge, from the local level, into the more abstract realms of pure science and government. 
	If those 18th century scholars had allocated humanist traits to artisans, would our 21st century society have developed the strong emotional connections to machines that our ancestors displayed towards the first stone mills and the mull-board plough? How much greater would the average citizen’s technical intelligence be if natural philosophers, along with industrialization, hadn’t taken the roots of technology for themselves? Public knowledge of our sewers, our food system, our road maintenance, is, for the most part, nonexistent. I don’t refer to detailed, intricate understanding, I refer to the basics. How do you sew a t-shirt? When are they ever going to repave Eastlake Ave? Most technologies have been stripped so far out of the hands of the public that we now have no control over them, and the 18th century distinction between science and art is partly to blame.
Note: The Futurist Manifesto certainly has a poetic quality that is nearly incomprehensible at times. I was enticed to search for more information on Marinetti to get some context and understand what I was even reading, but I stopped myself. I wanted to follow the question’s prompt and read the principle source, of which I had no prior knowledge of, and then explain where I felt Marinetti’s motives lay. As my knowledge of Italy during this time period, Marinetti’s context, is practically nonexistent, I forewarn of the conjecture contained below and understand if I need to revise my approach.
	Out with the old, in with the new - technological enthusiasts of the early 20th century advocated for the destruction of old systems to herald in a new age. There was technological fervor in both Italy and America, but it was manifested in different ways. Italy was fiendish for war approaching WW1, the Italian Filippo Marinetti, a poet, wanted to write his verses and create an anarchist society from the ashes of Italy’s museums. Marinetti was explicit in his call for violence and war, one of the few areas of his Futurist Manifesto where he replaced whimsical semantics with concise declarations. His desire for destruction was tempered with the proposal of a new social system based on constant evolution. In the face of the era’s technological revolution, Marinetti didn’t advocate for more factories, but fewer institutions. Filippo’s contemporary Americans were concerned with another form of creation through destruction, one which bulldozed nature and the craftsman class to form a new economy and society. The “original inventors”  of America created systems which were radical , a label easily adhered to Marinetti’s violent, sports-car driven Manifesto. In the following paragraphs, I will analyze how differences in context between Italy and America, reasonably technologically equivalent cultures, led to societies with diverging technological objectives.
	I’m not breaking new ground when I say Marinetti promoted fascist principles in his Manifesto. His anti-feminism and glorification of war-culture were especially indicative of the growing Italian fascist movement of the early 20th century. Marinetti diverges from the fascist agenda in an important way by advocating his proposed system sustain only a brief longevity. He didn’t want a static government but one where “younger and stronger men than we (the governing body, or status quo) throw us in the waste paper basket like useless manuscripts” . There is the analogy of technology as a tsunami, swallowing up everything which came before, itself waiting to be enveloped by the next wave. Marinetti took the concept one step further; he embraced the cultural destruction that technology’s waters could bring. While his manifesto gave no indication of his own technical workmanship, Marinettie expressed admiration for his “shark, and advocated for the works of the engineer, especially in his 11th bulletin point of the will and testament section. His acceptance of new inventions, companionship of engineers in their “infernal stokeholes” , and anthropomorphism of high-powered engines show a desire for the total culture union with technology.
	Marinetti wrote of a world void of independence, a place where new ideas were oppressed under a social system which venerated the dead at the expense of the living. If the ruling class, those stars  which Marinetti hurled his insolence at, were as oppressive as he claimed, why? We know that Britain mined Italy for its engineers in the 16th and 17th century. We also know that Britain became the leader of Europe shortly after, which suggests that at a certain point, the Italians had given away all their secrets, or had them stolen. Perhaps the leaders of Italy put the brakes on technological advance – what good was technological enterprise if not to serve the needs of the state? I don’t think it’s a stretch to say that Leonardo da Vinci is more famous in America than Elmer Sperry, yet “Leonardo actually constructed only a few of his brilliant conceptions” .  Were his mechanical arts given less precedence than his painting by the political powers of Italy? Marinetti speaks of his disdain for the fine arts, calling them a waste of time and a poor attempt at the recreation of nature.  The Manifesto is an Us vs. Them piece, with no concessions made by Marinetti towards his opposition’s point-of-view. In this black-and-white moral rubric, his disdain for the fine arts must have come from its association with the ruling class. Marinetti wrote of his enemy “encamped in their celestial bivouacs”, certainly a reference to the monolithic Catholic church, or “death with its black fur dappled with pale crosses”  as Marinetti described it. What came first, Rome, or the Cross? Either way, the Catholic church was old, dead, growth to Marinetti. It is worth noting that the Church had vested interest in, if not dominion over, many of the museums and cemeteries which Marinetti felt needed razing, driving his desire for their razing. 
	In a short concluding contrast, America offered its inventors what Italy lacked. The new nation had plenty of land to build sanctuaries for pensive pacing and musing naps  . America was a baby, not old enough to have the price-less architecture, museums and cemeteries which covered Italy.  There was also a ruling class which encouraged the branching nature of its country’s technological advancement, and who granted an elevated social status to its engineers. The United States was also free of perhaps the heaviest of Marinetti’s crosses, being founded on a separation from the Catholic church. Finally, the continent was an entire ocean away from its true rivals, Europe, allowing for inventors like Nikola Tesla expend their creative juices on non-militaristic technology, instead of worrying about an inland invasion from Germany.
	Todd Gilbert
History 315
Dr.Bruce W. Hevly
	During the early modern era, the engineering profession received an influx of practitioners who lacked first-hand experience with the projects they undertook but offered theoretical knowledge instead. These newcomers resurfaced the “trouble with Techne” as the traditional, working engineers of the period found themselves fighting against natural scientists for their trade’s dignity and value. This tale was told again, with striking similarity, during the early 20th century. Again, the profession saw an influx of scholarly professionals who lacked practical experience, this time augmenting the deficit with university-derived knowledge. Corporate system managers and university scientists played the role of natural philosophers as they appropriated the works, and downplayed the value, of their contemporary crafts-workers - the independent inventor. Below I will discuss how engineers from both eras operated in a profession that was exchanging its practical roots for branches of science.
	Engineering was still a new discipline during the 16th century, and the qualifications for an expert were loosely defined. Jacopo Aconcio is the perfect example of theoretical “expertise-in-context” . Aconcio arrived in Britain with no practical experience as a fortification engineer but he had studied the works of engineers from afar and written a treatise about fortification. Based on his theoretical knowledge, Aconcio was brought in to advise the Earl of Bedford in construction of the Earl’s fortifications. In contrast to the theoretical, Sir Richard Lee gained oversight of the Berwick refortification because of his practical experience. His knowledge was heavily relied upon as the project’s investors, military and noblemen, who had accepted their ignorance towards the practical details of fortress construction. These investors relied on Lee’s recommendations, free from their own opinions . While these are just two small case studies, they show the near equal footing a theoretical engineer could hold with a more practical one during the 16th century. 
	The divide of the theoretical from the practical continued in the 20th century under the American System. As corporate research labs became more prominent, they relied on university educated scientists, not the engineers of America’s past who had learned their craft through apprenticeships . Unlike independent inventors, such as Edison , these research labs sought specialists. Schools and corporations collaborated so that professors and students would partake in the work being done at corporations, gaining the students needed practical knowledge and the corporations free labor. While the practical engineer flourished during the early modern era, their 20th century counterpart were edged out as corporations employed less self-made men, and more graduate students.
	The debate of Techne vs. episteme resurfaced during the EM period as aristocratic natural scientists sought to maintain their social status. Technical professionals had moved up the social ladder, and a new discussion emerged regarding the virtue of these craftsman and their deeds. Technical writers such as Agricola “defended the dignity”  of the technician while Lorenzo Ghiberti advocated the need for morals in the crafts.  To fight back, natural scientists appropriated the works of craftsman and placed themselves as the source of any true inspiration behind technical works . The 20th century saw a remarkably similar approach between writers, independent inventors and corporate scientists. Thorstein Veblen advocated for the genius of the independent, claiming “the concepts of the scientists came to be drawn in the image of the workmen” . Almost predictably, practitioners of pure science feared a loss in the credibility of everything from their education to their scientific contributions, and even the “purely intellectual pursuit of scientific knowledge”  itself. These scientists began disparaging the works of independents, claiming that it was science which brought any true advance in technology. 
	While the question of engineering’s morality, and the big-brother quarrel between techne and episteme, occurred at roughly equivalent levels during the early modern period and the 20th century, the differences between the desired end-result of an engineer’s work are of contextual interest to the debate. During the EM, engineers were project managers, using their parachute expertise  to oversee construction sites. Personal accomplishment was highly valued during this time, both theoretical and practical, and engineers touted both actual physical works and treatises surrounding their works. The main purpose of those early engineers was creating a military advantage. As military technology requires a constant cutting-edge to succeed, constant evolution was required of materials and technique was required. While governments of the 20th century still relied on engineers for advances in military technology, corporations had begun employing a significant number of engineers. The engineer became a producer and designer of weapons of mass consumption. The 20th century engineers, were also increasingly hired to augment an existing system, not craft one from scratch.
	This shift from government to corporation shows a most interesting change in the goods engineers were hired to protect. Originally, engineers enabled monarchs to secure their lands and people. Under corporations, they help board members secure profits. The engineer went from protecting one tyrant’s gold, to protecting another’s. 
Todd Gilbert
Bruce W. Hevly
Note: I decided to play my “answer the question I wish I had been asked” card, hopefully it was worth the gamble. This is in response to the question – “in the spirit of Insull, what is your book proposal for developing a new technological system?”
	Today in Seattle, there is a general worry that our city lacks cohesive planning, unless of course we all take Amazon’s decisions to be our plan. The city’s restaurant industry could use a guiding hand transforming it from its current model and after having paid my restaurant dues I feel confident to construct, with the help of dedicated research and the collaboration of others, an alternative, better model for the American restaurant. I am inspired to write a book exploring how technologies, including the ones with Puget Sound origins, have shaped the modern restaurant structure and created unrealistic cultural expectations. I would propose restructuring of this sector and its related technology, leading to an increase of the workforces’ quality of life and better handling of its resources. It is my hope that by keeping in mind the conservative pace of any technological change, and by not vilifying current and past characters, I can attract readers from all facets of the industry, who recognize the need for systemic improvement. 
	When augmenting any system, one must keep in mind the wishes and ego of the owner, which is why I will begin with them. There must be a change to the general public’s perception that a restaurant is a good first business, one which does not require previous industry experience. It is no secret that most of the invested restaurant workforce has been removed with the adoption of Ford production-line techniques and by the franchise corporate structure which has replaced workmanship with bureaucracy. I believe history will show that both corporate bosses and their crews have contributed to creating an industry with turnover rates exceeding 70 percent . For one hoping to open their own establishment, there is a common theory perpetuated within the industry, that the failure rate of small restaurants is greater than the failure rate of other small businesses. An article from Forbes says otherwise and suggests that the number of employees a business originally employs has the biggest effect on its success . Hopefully more research into the economic outcomes of newly opened restaurants will collaborate this article and, along with similar evidence, encourage the entrepreneurial-inclined within the industry to unite instead of venturing solo. 
	The industry consumes huge amounts of plastic, metal and paper, and I can personally vouch that most of a restaurants recyclable goods are not properly recycled, with causes to be explained in the employee chapter unmentioned in this short essay. I propose radical changes to restaurant consumption, both in terms of utilizing reusable packaging, and how the industry can influence the processing of the $11 billion dollars-worth of recyclable materials thrown away by Americans every year . Depending on your commitment to zero emissions, it is reasonable to ship produce from California and Mexico to the Pacific Northwest during the winter season. Disappointedly to conservationist, this importation continues during the summer with greens, peppers, corn, berries, etc. even though these plants grow in Washington state. A history of this food distribution network origins, with an emphasis on Charlie’s Produce, the “largest independent produce company on the West Coast” , will provide insight into how to best move agriculture closer to home. I think this will be a great location to discuss the evolution of the grocery store and how together with production farms they have created a cultural expectation that food is always available and in season, which has necessitated that restaurants offer everything from Coconut Curry to Chili’s Rellenos. 
	Servers and cooks, long divided in duty and motivation, suffer together from the current restaurant system. During the Taylorism of the United States, the iron worker received unionized health care, and the R & D scientists of Bell laboratories were freed of the financial risk incumbered when funding a lab. The restaurant work force has no received no such industry reformation. Employees lack health benefits, with few retirement or health care plans offered within the industry . The workers also don’t have financial security, as the kitchen staff are notoriously undercompensated and the waitstaff’s income is dependent on patron whim. 
	The previous paragraphs could easily be expanded and broken up into 5-6 chapters, and with the addition of a few more chapters would constitute a book of about 250 pages. After writing 25 pages on the history of technology this quarter, and enjoying the process, I think this is a reasonable project for the next year, although I do wonder of its value. Most literature that comes out of the kitchen is autobiographical and rarely offers advice on how a chef should run their kitchen or how they should act in this current climate. The tattooed bad-boy club chef image should be replaced with one which recognizes their role as a steward of land and technology. The other main source of restaurant literature stems from the “I did it, so can you!” ex-restauranteur venture-capitalist camp. These books offer chapters about “creating the concept” or “choosing a location”, i.e. they are written for people who have no idea how to open a restaurant, and probably shouldn’t being doing so. The methods in this proposed book would be written for a completely different type of restauranteur; local owners with industry experience who will assist current technological system managers in augmenting their existing operations to provide a better experience for producer, consumer and the environment. 

A more recently developed issue to tackle is how food delivery services have replaced the social experience of dining out, with anonymous, cold food, especially when just recently, chefs were seen as celebrities, even here in Seattle.

. I expect that the restaurants of Seattle’s log-milling days were shaped by the rough patrons they served. I remind the reader that the recycling program of Seattle is underdeveloped, with the program in Portland much more well organized and effective. With American proclivity to waste wood, was the wasting of resources ingrained into heavily forested Seattle, and thus its workers? Perhaps a scurrilous conspiracy theory but the example shows existence of local trails containing cultural insight into the HOT.
For example, the roads are not just ill-maintained, but new routes are poorly designed, with the new I-90 tunnel entrance at the Seattle Center a perfect example of how the city tries to pack expansive projects (like an entire freeway entrance) inside a city built on an isthmus. The homeless situation, the housing crisis, corporate over-lording, these are areas which require a systemic restructuring, but are problems I can not sufficiently provide answers for.
. To make the situation even less inspiring, the current corporate hierarchy offers growth in title only because the culture of the restaurant cannot be dependent to employee in a franchise atmosphere and raises often come in the form of salaried positions which expect 60+ hours a week. When the ratio of pay to hours worked is calculated, the worker often finds themselves making less per hour then before.   
Melvin Kranzberg is the lovable, grandfather figure of the history of technology’s origin story. Kranzberg was a social butterfly who, through collaborations with many disparate professions, established the history of technology as its own, distinct field of study, separate from the history of science. Melvin was a driving force for scholarly collaboration and encouraged historians to place technology “in historical perspective” , believing that every generation was writing its own history, with every man their own historian. Kranzberg was optimistic about the moral implications of technology and stressed the role of human agency in the sociocultural changes which accompanied technology. Most interestingly to myself, he approached his own life’s contingencies with the same process he approached the history of technology, setting a standard for what a historian should know, and how they should act. This essay will focus on a few key locations where Melvin’s context shaped his theories, and thus the profession to which he eventually belonged. 
	Melvin grew up in a cold war environment, where international collaboration was shunned.  Despite this, he travelled across Europe as an undergraduate, studying economics and the history of France. The industrialization of The French Second Empire sparked Kranzberg’s fascination with technological processes.  The French influenced Kranzberg’s opinion on which tools a historian should utilize. While his American contemporaries relied on political and economic factors to explore history, Melvin saw the benefits of using cultural aspects, such as “linguistics, architecture, forklore” , to better understand context.  After earning a doctorate at Harvard, Kranzberg enlisted in the army, where he received an accelerated education in electronics, electrical engineering and radar.  After all his technical education, the wisdom of the army sent him to basic training. Melvin’s inability to make a great foot soldier was quickly discovered, and he eventually ended up in France, charged with convincing German captives to spill their secrets. He was honorarily discharged after surviving a direct assault which left others in his company dead. Already trained as a historian and economist, Kranzberg’s military service gave him first-hand knowledge of engineers, their works and theories. He directly interacted with the technological experts, and thus the technological culture, of his own era. Those early international collaborations between engineers and the young historian served as the template Kranzberg used throughout his career to transcend disciplinary boundaries. In his energetic undertakings, he united social-scientists, humanists, and inventors and “nurtured and promoted”  the careers of those young men and women. While others were shunned away from the conceptually contentious history of technology, Kranzberg took delight in the dynamic, conflicting views his profession contained. In his Technology and History, he wrote that the conflict “will provide employment for historians of technology for decades to come” . 
	After serving in the army, Melvin became a professor of Western Civilization at the Case Institute of Technology. Engineering schools had been recently required to offer their engineering students instruction in social issues. Case hired Melvin to help develop a college system capable of generating a more diverse engineer. Kranzberg and his students  quickly became bored with the “old chestnut”  questions Western Civilization historians tended to ask. He decided to analyze history using the same techniques Lewis Mumford had utilized in his Technic and Civilization, focusing on culture’s relationship to technology. Incredibly introspective, Kranzberg not only questioned the engineer’s contribution to civilization, but recognized his own role in crafting the future relationship between technician and society. The curriculum he created sought to raise the engineer’s social status by showing that engineering problems were as beautiful and intellectually complex as the problems solved by natural scientists .  
	Kranzberg was a prolific writer, eventually penning eleven books and over 150 articles . In 1967, he co-authored a two-volume textbook titled Western Civilization, unique amongst similar contemporary books with the inclusion of a technology section.  In the preface, the authors made their claim that technology had been a “major determinant in Western civilization” , despite little recognition of technology’s impact. Western Civilization devoted a chapter to the modern fishing industry, a great example of Kranzberg’s ability to interweave the past with the present, the lowly with the noble. The chapter discussed the increased efficiency of 20th century fishing industries as a result of mechanization and new inventions such as the refrigerator . The chapter also discussed how the use of materials, techniques, and associated social values, varied across the globe, and impacted local fisheries unequally. Near the end of the chapter, Western Civilization discussed the ethics of the new technological efficiency, and its effects on the world’s oceans.  This section of the book associated technological innovation, ethics, and the human role of choice with one of the humblest, seemingly nontechnical professions.

	There are plenty-enough articles concerning Kranzberg’s Six Laws of Technology, thus a lengthy recounting, even concerning their impact on the history of technology, seems unnecessary. The first two laws are mentioned to demonstrate the emphasis Kranzberg placed on social factors within the HOT. The first law argued that technology was controllable, and subject to the will of man. This law also told of the unforeseen consequences of technology, which often occur when “benign technologies are employed on a massive scale” . The first rule is a prime example of how Kranzberg analyzed the way a society balanced its means, needs, and technology. He explained that wealthy western countries had banned the use of DDT only because they could afford alternatives. A country like India, on the other hand, lacked the resources to develop those same alternatives. Melvin dived deeper into Indian culture and explained the reliance which India held on DDT, not only as a pesticide, but as a controller of disease, demonstrating that cultural factors can determine a technology’s role in society. The second law, contentious in nature, claimed invention as the mother of necessity. Rather than human desire driving the invention process, Kranzberg taught that inventions themselves birthed necessity. Once a machine had been created, improvements to the machine were necessary, and thus more inventions were created - it was the choice of the engineer which parts got sanded and which were cast aside.
	So far, the Kranzberg timeline has been one catered to create an optimist, yet he suffered many failures of his own. The failures as artifacts themselves are trivial, but Melvin displayed his characteristic passion and genius when handling those setbacks. After the army, before his time at the Case Institute, Kranzberg was a professor at Amherst College. Friends with the college’s president , he hoped for a long tenure but was disappointedly released from his position. Melvin found himself at the less-prestigious Case but instead of falling victim to a life of average victories, he radically changed the history of technology profession. While at Case, Melvin entered into a 3-year contract to write a textbook on Western Civilization. After 13 years, the book still incomplete, the publisher finally canceled the contract, bruising Kranzberg’s ego. Melvin, of course, spun this disaster around and began working with Carroll Pursell on the successful Technology in Western Civilization. While Melvin often had an easy time finding collaborators, a blow to moral came when The History of Science Society, whom Kranzberg assumed were his contemporaries, turned him away due to the baseness of technology. Kranzberg felt the HSS didn’t fully appreciate the history of technology and he created the Society for the History of Technology in response. Instead of remaining bitter about their early relationship, Kranzberg eventually helped the two groups cooperate and hold joint annual meetings. Perhaps a social-addict, Melvin also cofounded the International Committee for the History of Technology, where his personality was “instrumental in keeping the committee functioning” . 
	Kranzberg seemed to exemplify the best of what makes us human. He worked tirelessly on his craft and sought recognition not only for himself, but for everyone within his profession. Melvin was a creator of systems and a great collaborator due to his ability to perform under pressure in situations unfamiliar and unusual.   His biggest contribution to the history of technology was establishing  “the history of technology as a new field of study”.  This essay is far from a comprehensive look at Melvin’s contributions and life, especially having not mentioned any of his work as an economist or his popular publication Technology and Culture but the intent was to use Kranzberg’s own techniques to explain Kranzberg and his viewpoints.







	





