EAST OF EDEN


‘John Steinbeck’s novel follows the pattern of The . 
Pastures of Heaven but is on the scale of The Grapes of 
Vratli. It is indeed longer; but it is also finer. We are 
lack in the Salinas Valley, with its exuberance of ' 
latural beauty and wild Life which he knows so well, 
nd with its rich varieties of human kind; but not-far • 
iway is Salinas town with its stores, saloons, and , 
vhorehouses; and further back again are King Town, 
vVatsonville, State politics, universities, and the First' 
vVorld War. It is the story of families rooted in the 
soil but torn apart by differences of birth and taste, by 
primitive love and hate, and by civilized desires fol^. 
more wealth than can be made by farming and better' 
education than can be got at the local school. The ‘ 
Hamiltons and the Trasks recur in all four parts of 
the epic. Samuel Hamilton, the patriarchal Irishman; 
with his wife Liza standTor the power of good at the 
back of things . , . 


‘ Man alone has the choice of good and evil. And 
this is illustrated in the characters of Adam Trask’s 
sons, Caleb and Aron, who are really Cain and Abel. 
For their mother is a moral monster, cruel and mali- ¦ 
cious . . . and Caleb has to struggle against that ele- 
ment of her in his make-up . . . 


‘ 'What stays in the mind is the sure outline in which 
Steinbeck etches his character portraits and the moral 
intensity of this epic of ordinary lives.’ 

- Time and Tide 



EAST OF EDE: 


‘John Steinbeck’s novel follows the pattern of The 
Pastures of Heaven but is on the scale of The Grapes of 
Wrath. It is indeed longer; but it is also finer. We are 
back in the Salinas Valley, with its exuberance of 
natural beauty and wild life which he knows so well, 
and with its rich varieties of human kind; but not'far 
aw'ay is Salinas town with its stores, saloons, and 
w'horehouses ; and further back again are King Town, 
Watsonville, State politics, universities, and the FirSt 
World War. It is the story of families rooted in, the 
soil but tom apart by differences of birth and taste, by 
primitive love and hate, and by civilized desires fob; 
more wealth than can be made by farming and bette£ 
education than can be got at the local school. The 
Harml’tons and the Trasks reciu: in all four parts of 
the epic. Samuel Hamilton, the patriarchal Irishman, 
with his w^ife Liza standTor the power of good at the 
back of things ... 

‘Man alone has the choice of good and evil. And 
this is illustrated in the characters of Adam Trash’s 
sons, Caleb and Aron, who are really Cain and Abel, 
For their mother is a moral monster, cruel and mail- . 
cious . . . and Caleb has to struggle against that ele- 
ment of her in his make-up ... 

‘What stays in the mind is the sure outline in which 
Steinbeck etches his , character pornaits and the mond 
intensity of this epic nf ordinary ordTide^ 



Other PAN Books by John Steinbeck 

. • SWEET THURSDAY 
THE MOON IS DOWN 
THE PEARL and BURNING BRIGHT 
HE WINTER OF'OUR DISCONTENT 


CONDITIONS OF SALE 

This book shall not be lent, re-sold, hired out 
or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in 
any form of binding or cover other than that 
in which it is published 



EAST OF EDEN 

JOHN STEINBECK 



unabridged 


PAN BOOKS LTD : LONDON 




PASCAL COVICI 


Bear Pat^ 

You came upon me carving some kind of little figure oui\ 
of wood and you said, ^Why don’t you make something for . 
me?’ • • ' 

I asked you what you wanted, and you said, ‘A box’ 

‘What for?’ 

‘To put things in.’ 

‘What things?’ 

‘Whatever you have,’ you said. 

Well, here’s your box. Nearly eveiything I have is in it, 
and it is not full. Pain and excitement are in it, and feeling 
good or bad and evil thoughts and good thoughts ~ the plea- 
sure of design and some despair and the indescribable joy. of 
creation. 

And on top of these are all the gratitude and lave I have 
for you. ' 

. And still the box is not full. 


JOHN 




-CONTENTS 


Part One 

7 

Part Two 

\ 

123 

Part Three 

261 


Part Four 


391 




lEast of 'Eden 




Part One 


CHAPTER 1 

I 

The Salinas Vallejo is in Northern California. It is a long'i 
narrow swale beuveen two ranges of mountains, and the Salinas' 
River winds and twists up the centre until it falls at last- into 
•Monterey Bay. 

I remember my childhood names for grasses and secret flovi-ers. 

I remember • where a tosd may live and what time the birds 
awaken in the summer - and what trees and seasons smelled like 

- how people looked and walked and smelled even. The memorj' 
of odours is very rich. 

I remember that the Gabilan Mountains to die east of the val- 
¦ley were light gay mountains full of sun and loveliness and a 
kind of invitation, so that you wanted to climb into their warm 
foothills almost as you want to climb into the lap of a beloved ' 
mother. They were beckoning mountains with .a brown grass 
love. The Santa Lucias stood up against the sky to the west and 
kept the valley from the open sea, and they were dark and brood- 
ing - unfriendly and dangerous. I always found in myself a 
dread of west and a love of east. Where I ever got such an idea I 
cannot say, unless it could be that the morning came over the 
peaks of the Gabilans and the night drifted back from the ridges 
of the Santa Lucias. It may be that the birth and death of the 
day had some part in my feeling about the uvo ranges of moun- 
tains. 

From both sides of the valley little streams slipped out of tlie 
hill canyons and fell into the bed of the Salinas River. In the, 
winter of wet years the streams ran full-freshet, and they swelled 
the river until sometimes it raged and boiled, bank-full, and then" 
it was a destroyer. The river tore the edges of the farm, lands and 

- washed whole acres down; it toppled barns and houses into 
itself, to go floating and bobbing away. It trapped cows and pigs 
and sh^p and drowned them in its muddy brown water and 

. carried them to the sea. Then when the late spring came, the^ 
river drew in from its edges and the sandbanks appeared. And in- 

7 ' 



le summer the river didn’t run at aU hbove grotmd Some pools 
ould be left in the deep swirl places under a lugh bank. The ¦ 
L and grasses grew back, and vviUows straightened up mth 
le flood debris in their upper, branches. The Sahnas was only a 
art-time river. The summer sun drove it underground. It was 
6t a fine river at all, but it was the only one we had, and so we 
oasted about it- how dangerous it was in a wet winter and how 
rv it was in a dry sximmer; You can boast about anything if. 
c’s aU you have. Maybe the less you have, the more you are re- 

luired to boast. . . , ¦ 

The floor of the Salinas Valley, beuveen the ranges and below 
•he foothills, is level because this valley used to be the bottom of 
1 hundred-mile inlet from the sea. The river mouth at Moss 
Landing was centuries ago the entrance to this long inland 
water. Once, fifty miles down the valley, my father bored a well. 
The drill came up first with topsoil and thm with gravel- and 
then with wliite sea sand full of shells and even pieces of whale- 
bone. There were twenty feet of sand and then black earth again, , 
and e\’en a piece of redwood, that imperishable wood that does 
not rot. Before the inland sea the valley must have been a forest. 
And those things load happened right under our feet. And it 
seemed to me sometimes at night that I could feel both the sea 
.and the redwood forest before it. 

On the wide level acres of the valley the topsoil lay deep and 
^rtile. It rcquued only a rich winter of rain to make it break 


forth in grass and flowers. The spring flowers in a wet year were- 
unbelicvablc. The whole valley floor, and the foothills too, would 
be carpeted with lupins and poppies. Once a woman told me 
that coloured flowers would seem more bright if you added a 
few white flowers to give the colours dcBnition. Every petal of 
blue lupin is edged with white, so that a field of lupins is more 
blue than you can imagine. And mixed with these were splashes 
of California poppies. These too are of a burning colour— not 
orange, not gold, but if pure gold were liquid and could raise a 
cream, that golden cream might be like the colour of the poppies. 
When their season was over the yellow mustard came up and 
greu’ to a great height. When my grandfather came into the -val- 
ley the mustard was so tall that a man on horseback showed only 
his head above tlie yellow flowers. On the uplands the grass 
would be strewn with buttercups, with hen-and-chickens, with 
black-centred yellow violets. And a little later in the season 
there would be red and yellow stands of Indian paintbrush. 
These were the flowers of the open spaces exposed to the sun. 


8 



Under the live oaks, shaded and dusky, the maidenhair flour- 
ished and gave a good smell, and under the mossy banks of'the ¦ 
watercourses whole clumps of five-fingered ferns and goldy- 
backs himg down. Then there were harebells, tiny lanterns, 
cream white and almost sinful-looking, and these were so rare 
and magical that a child, finding one, felt singled out and special; 
all day long. / ‘ 

When June came the grasses headed out and turned brown, 
and the hills tmmed a brown which was not brown but a gold 
and saffron and red - an indescribable colour. And from then on. 
-imtil the next rains the earth dried and the streams stopped. 
Cracks appeared on the level ground. The Salinas River sank 
under its sand. The wind blew down the valley, picking up dust 
and straws, and grew stronger and harsher as it went south. It 
stopped in the evening. It was a rasping nervous wind, and the 
dust particl^ cut into a man’s skin and burned his eyes. Men 
working in the fields wore goggles and tied handkerchiefs 
around their noses to keep the dirt out. 

The valley land was deep and rich, but the foothills wore only 
a skin of topsoil no deeper than the grass roots; and the farther 
up the hills you went, the thinner grew the soil, with flints stick- 
ing through, until at the brush line it was a kind of dry flinty 
gravel that reflected the hot sun blindingly. 

I have spoken of the rich years when the rainfall was plentiful. 
But there were dry years too, and they put a terror on the valley. 
The water came in a tliirty-year cycle. There would be five or 
¦ six wet and wonderful years vvh'en there might be nineteen to 
twenty-five inches of rain, and the land would shout with grass. 
Then would come six or seven pretty good years of twelve to 
sixteen inches of rain. And then the dry years would come, and 
sometimes there would be only seven or eight inches of rain. 
The land dried up and the grasses headed out miserably a few 
inches high and great bare scabby places appeared in the valley. 
The. live oaks got a crusty look and the sagebrush was grey. The 
land cracked and the. springs dried up and the cattle listlessly 
nibbled dry twigs. Then the farmers and the ranchers would be 
filled with disgust for the Salinas Valley. The cows would grow 
thin and sometimes starve to death. People would have to haul 
water in barrels to their farms just for drinking. Some families 
would sell out for nearly nothing and move away. And it never 
failed that during the dry 3^ears the people forgot about the rich 
years, and during the wet years they lost all memory of the dry 
years. It was always that way. 


9 



iid that was the long Salinas Valley. Its history was^like that of 
le rest of the state. First there were Indians, an inferior Freed 
-ithbut. energy, inventiveness, or culture, a people that lived on- 
rubs and grasshoppers and shellfish, too lazy to hunt or fis - 
"hey ate vvliat they could pick up and planted nothing. They 
io'undcd bitter acorns for floiir. Even their warfare was a weary 


jantomime. ,• . , < j 

¦'Then the hard, dry Spaniards came exploring through, greedy • 
ind • realistic, and their greed was for gold or God. They .col- 
ccted souls as they collected jewels. They gathered mountains , 
md valleys,, rivers and whole horizons, the way a man might 
iiQvv gain title to building lots. These tough, dried-up men 
moyed restlessly up the coast and down. Some of them stayed oii 
grants as large as principalities, given to them by Spanish, kings 
who had not the faintest idea of the gift. These first owners 
lived in poor feudal settlements, and their cattle ranged freely 
and multiplied. Periodically the owners killed the cattle for 
their hides and tallow and left the meat to the vultures and 
coyotes.- 

When the Spaniards came they had to give everything they' 
saw a name. This is the first duty of any explorer - a duty and a 
^privilege. You must name a thing before you can note it on your 
hand-drawn map. Of course they were religious people, and the 
men who could read and write, who kept the records and drew 
the maps, were the tough untiring priests who travelled with the 
soldiers. Thus the first names of places were saints’ names or re- 
ligious holidays celebrated at stopping places. There are many 
saints, but they are not inexhaustible, so that we find repetitions 
in the first namings. We have San Miguel, St Michael, Sah 
Ardo, San Bernardo, San Benito, San Lorenzo, San Carlos, San 
Francisquito. And then the holidays — Natividad, the Nativity; 
Nacimiente, the Birth; Soledad, the Solitude. But places were 
also named from the way the e-xpedition felt at the time: Buena 
Esperanza, good hope; Buena Vista because the view was 
beautiful, and Chualar because it was pretty. The descriptive 
narhes followed: Paso de los Robles because of the oak trees; 
Los- Laureles for the laurels; Tularcitos because of the reeds ¦ 
in the swamp; and Salinas for the allaili which was white as 
salt.- 

. Thm places were named after animals and birds seen - Gabi- 
he hawks which flew in those mountains; Topo for 


10 


the mole; Los Gatos for the wild cats. The suggestions some-, 
times came from the nature of the place itself : Tassajara, a, cup 
and saucer; Lagima Seca, a dry lake; Corral de'Tierra for a 
fence of earth; Paraiso because it was like Heaven. ¦ ¦ ’ 

Then the Americans came — more greedy because there were 
more of them. They took the lands, remade the laws to make 
their titles good. And farmholds spread over the land, first in the 
valleys and then up the foothill slopes, small wooden houses 
roofed with redwood shakes, corrals of split poles. Wherever a 
trickle of water came out of the ground a house sprang up and 
a family began to grow and multiply. Cuttings of red geraniums 
and rose bushes were planted in the. door-yards. Wheel tracks of 
buckboards replaced the trails, and fields of com and barley and 
wheat squared out of the yellow mustard. Every ten miles along 
the travelled routes a general store and blacksmith shop hap- 
pened, and these became the nuclei of little towns, Bradley, King 
City, Greenfield. 

The Americans had a greater tendency to name places after 
people than had the Spaniards. After the valleys were settled the 
names of places refer more to things which happened there, and 
these to me are the most fascinating of all names because each 
name suggests a story that has been forgotten. I think of BoIm 
N euva, a new purse; Morocojo, a lame Moor (who was he and 
how did he get there?); Wild Horse Canyon and Mustang Grade 
and Shirt Tail Canyon.^ The names of places carry a charge of 
the people who named them, reverent or^irrev^erent, descriptive, 
either poetic or disparaging. You can name anything San Lor- 
enzo, but Shirt Tail Canyon or the Lame Moor is, something 
quite different. , 

The wind whistled over the settlements in the afternoon, and 
the farmers began to set out mile-long wind-breaks of eucalyptus 
to keep the ploughed topsoil from blowing away. And this is 
about the way the Salinas Valley was when my grandfather 
brought his wife and settled in the foothills to the east of King 
City. 


11 



CHAPTER 2 


must depend on hearsay, on old photogxapte, on stones told, . 
ind'on memories which are hazy and mixed with fable in trymg 
o tell you about the Hamiltons. They were not eminent people, 
md tliefe are few records concerning them except for the usual 
papers on birth, marriage, land ownership, and death. 

'Yptmg Samuel Hamilton came from the north of Ireland and 
so did his wife. He was the son of small farmers, neither rich nor 
poor, who had lived on one landhold and in one stone house for. 
many hundreds of years. The Hamiltons managed to be remark- 
ably well educated and well read; and, as is so often true in that 
green country, they were connected and related to very great, 
proplc and very smaU pieople, so that one cousin might be a 
baronet and another cousin a beggar. And of course they were 
descended from the ancient kings of Ireland, as every Irishman is; • 
"Why Samuel left the stone house and the green acres of his 
ancestors I do not know. He was never a political man, so it, is 
not likely a charge of rebellion drove him out, and he was scrupu- 
',lously honest, which eliminates the police as prime movers. • 
There was a whisper - not even a rumour but rather an unsaid 
feeling - in my family that it was love drpve him out, ahd not 
love of the wife he married. But whether it was too successful . 
love or whether he left in pique at unsuccessful love, I do not 
know. We always preferred to think it was the former. Saimuel 
had good looks and charm and gaiety. It is hard to imagine that 
any country Irish girl refused him. 

He came to the Salinas Valley full-blown and hearty, full of 
inventions and energy. His eyes were very blue, and when Ke- 
was tired one of them wandered outwards a little. He was a big 
_ man but delicate in a way. In the dusty business of ranching he 
seemed always immaculate. His hands were clever. He was a. 
good blacksmith and carpenter and woodcarver, and he could 
improvise anything with bits of wood and metal. He was for 
ever inventing a new way of doing an old thing and doing it bet- 
ter and quicker, but he never in his whole life had any talent for 
making money. Other men who had the talent took Samuel’s 
tricks and sold them and grew rich, but Samuel barely made 
¦ wages aU his life. 

I don’t know what directed his steps towards the Salinas Val- 

12 



ley. It was an unlikely place for a man hom a jij,, , 

come to, but he came about thirty ycuvn lia 

centurj' and he brought with him his tiny Irifih wile' 

little woman humourless as a chicken. She Iiatl a (iuui p, , 

terian mind and a code of morals that pinned down and Inm p, 

bfains out of nearly evernhing that was pleammi to do. 

I do not know where Samuel met her, how he woocil l,,,, 
married. I think there must have been some otlicr girl pHnutd' 
somewhere in his heart, for he was a man of love and his wdfe 
was not a woman to show her feelmgs. .^nd in spite of this, in 
all-the years from his youth to his death m the Salinas Valley, 
there was no hint that Samuel ever went to any other woman. 

When Samuel and Liza came to the Salmas Vallei- all the 
level land was taken, the rich bottoms, the little fertile creases in 
the hills, the forests, but there was still margmm land to be 
homesteaded, and in the barren hills, to the east o; v. hat Si nov.- 
King City, Samuel Hamilton homesteaded. 

He followed the usual practice. He took a qu.yter-s'Xt;on for 
himself and a quarter-section for his wife, and since the va-- 
pregnant he took a quarter-section -for the child. Over tlie yearn 
nine children were bora, four boys and five girls, and ear.-, 
birth another quart«-section was added to the ranc.n. ana 
makes eleven quaner-sections, or seventeen hundred ar.i 


acres. 

If the land had been any good the Hamilton.' ivrjid have 
been rich people. But the acres were harsh and dry. There v.-er; 
no springs, and the crust of topsoil v.as so thm that the fii.nty 
bones stuck through. Even the sagebrush struggled to eon.'.t, and 
the oaks were dwarfed from lack of moisture. Even in rea-tonae/. 
good years there was so little feed that the cattle ken: t.hin run- 
ning about looking for enough to eat. From their barren hill: th.-: 
Hamiltons could look dotvn to the west and see the richnr-- o: 
, the bottom land and the greenness around the Salinas. PJver. 
Samuel built his house with his own hand.', and be hnih i 
barn and a blacksmith shop. He found quite soon that even if b* 
had ten thousand acres of hill country he could not make a Ir/- 
ing on the, bony soil without water. His clcv'cr bands csiifi t 
well-boring rig, and he bored wells on the lands of luckier .m'm 
He invented and built a threshing machine and moved tl-r-vuc.- 
the bottom farms in harvest time, threshing the grain hi: cv; 
farm would not raise. And in his shop he sharpened pkvr-- 
and mended harrows and wdded broken axl-; and horr;: 
Men from all over the district brought him tool: to mend a.v 

¦ - - IS 



to improve. Besides, they loved to hear Samuel talk of the world 
and its- thinking, of the poetry and philosophy that were going ¦ 
on outside the Salinas Valley. He had a rich deep voice, good 
both in song and in speech, and while he had no brogue there 
was a rise and a lilt and a cadence to his talk that made it sound ' 
sweet in the ears of the taciturn farmers from the valley bottom. 
They brought whisky too, and out of sight of the kitchen win- 
dow and the disapproving eye of Mrs Hamilton they took hot 
nips from the bottle and nibbled cuds of green wild anise to ’ 
coyer the whisky breath. It was a bad day when three or four 
, men were not standing around the forge, listening to Samuel's 
hammer and his talk. They called him a comical genius and car- 
ried his stories carefully home, and they wondered at how the 
stories spiUed out on the way, for they never sounded the same 
repeated in their own kitchens. 

Samuel should have been rich from his well rig and his thresh- 
ing machine and his shop, but he had no gift for business.^ His 
customers, always pressed for money, promised pa3rment after 
harvest, and then after Christmas, and then after - until at last 
they forgot it. Samuel had no gift for reminding them. And so 
the Hamiltons stayed poor. 

The children came along as regularly as the years. The few 
overworked doctors of the county did not often get to the 
ranches for a birth unless the joy turned nightmare and went on , 
for several days, Samuel Hamilton delivered all his own child- 
ren and tied the cords neatly, spanked the bottoms and cleaned 
up the mess. -When his youngest was born with some small ob- 
struction and began to turn black, Samuel put his mouth against 
the baby’s mouth and blew air in and sucked it out until the 
..;. baby could take over for himself. Samuel’s hands were so good 
and gentle that neighbours from twenty miles away would call 
. on him to help with a birth. And he was equally good \rith 
, mare, cow, or woman. . , 

¦ ¦ ' ^ great black book on an available shelf and it had 

gold letters on the cover -Dr Gunn's Family Medicine. Some 
pages were bent and beat up from use, and others were never 
opened to the light. To look through Dr Gunn is to know the . 
Hamiltons niedical history. These are the used sections - broken 
^n^^ cuts, bruises, mumps, measles, back-ache, scarlet fever, 
diphtheria, rhei^atism, female complaints, hernia, arid of 
cour^ cve^hing to do with pregnancy and the birth of child- . 
ren. The Hamiltons must have been either lucky or moral, for 
the sections on gonorrhea and syphilis were never opened. 

14 



Samuel had no equal for soothing hysteria and bringing quiet 
to a frightened child. It was the sweetness of his tongue and the 
tenderness of his soul, ^^d just as there was a cleanness about 
his body, so there was a’ cleanness in his thinking. Men coming 
to his blacksmith shop to tallc and listen dropped their ciursing- 
for a while, not from any kind of restraint but automatically, as 
though this were not the place for it. 

Samuel kept always a foreigimess. Perhaps it was in the ca- 
dence of his speech, and this had the effect of making men, and 
women too, tell him things thejr would not teU to relatives or 
close friends. His slight strangeness set him apart and made him 
safe as a repository. . 

Liza Hamilton was a very different kettle of fish. Her head 
was small and round and it held small round convictions. She 
had a button nose and a hard little set-back chin, a grippLog jaw 
set on its course even though the angels of God argued against.it. 

Liza was a good plain cook, and her house -it was always her 
house -was brushed and pummelled and washed. Bearing her 
children did not- hold her back very much— tv/o weeks at the 
most she had to be careful. She must have had a pelvic arch of 
whalebone, for she had big children one after the other. 

Liza had a finely developed sense of sin. Idleness was a sin, 
and card playing, which was a kind of idleness to her. She was 
suspicious of fun, whether it involved dancing or singing or 
even laughter. She felt that people having a good time were wide 
open to the devil. And this was a shame, for Samuel was a 
laughing man, but I guess Samuel was wide open to the devil. 
His wife protected him whenever she could. 

She wore her hair always pulled tight back and bunned behind 
in a hard knot. And since I can’t remember how she dressed, it 
must have been that she wore clothes that matched herself ex-' 
actly. She had no spark of humour and only occasionally a blade 
of cutting wit. She frightened her grandchildren because she had ' 
no weakness. She suffered bravely and tmcomplainingly through 
life, convinced that that was the way her God wanted everyone 
to live. She felt that rew'ards came later. 

XI 

When people first came to the West, particularly from the owned 
and fought-over farmlets of Europe, and saw so much land to 
be had for the signing of a paper and the building of a founda- 
tion, an itching land-greed seemed to come over them. They 

15 



'wanted more and more land — good land if-possiblej but land, 

¦ 'anyway. Perhaps they^had filaments of memory of feudal Europe 

¦ where great families became and remamed great because they, 

owned things. The early settlers took up land they didn’t need , 
and coiiidn’t use; they took up worthless land just to own it. 
And all proportions changed. A man who might have been weU- 
to-do on ten acres in Europe was rat-poor on two thousand in 
California. , . • 

It wasn’t very long until all the land in the barren htils near 
King City and San Ardo was taken up, and ragged families were 
scattered tfiough the hills, trying their best to scratch a living 
from the thin flinty soil. They and the coyotes lived clever, des- 
pairing, sub-marginal lives. They landed with no money, no, ¦ 
equipment, no tools, no credit, and particularly with no know- 
ledge of the new country^ and no technique for using it. I don’t 
know whether it \ras a divine stupidity or a great faith that let 
them do it. Surely such venture is nearly gone from the world.' 
And the families did survive and grow. They had a tool or a 
weapon that is also nearly gone, or perhaps it is only dormant 
for a while. It is argued that because they believed thoroughly in 

¦ a just, moral God they could, put their faith there and let the 
smaller securities take care of themselves. But I think that be- 
cause they trusted themselves and respected themselves as indi- 
"iduals, because thei' knew beyond doubt that they were valuable 

potentially moral units — because of this they could give 
God their own courage and dignity and then receive it back; 
Suck things have disappeared perhaps because men do not trust 
¦themselves any more, and when that happens there is nothing 
left except perhaps to find some strong sure man, even though 

¦ be may be wrong, and to dangle from his coat-tails. 

While many people came to the Salinas Valley penniless, there 
.. -were others who, having sold out somewhere else, arrived with 
. mo.ney to start a new life. These usually bought land, but good 
¦ land, and built their houses of planed lumber, and had carpets 
arid coloured-glass diamond panes in their windows. There were 
, numbers of these families and they got the good land of the val- 
ley and cleared the yellow mustard away and planted wheat. 

Siich a man was Adam Trask. ' ¦ 



CHAPTER 3 


I ' ' 

AdamTrask was bom on a farm on the outskirts of a little 
town which was not far from a big town in Connecticut. He was 
an only son, and he was born six months after his . father was 
mustered into a Connecticut regiment in 1862. Adam’s mother 
ran the farm, bore Adam, and still had time to embrace a primi- 
tive theosophy. She felt that her husband would surely be killed 
by the wild and barbarous rebels, and she prepared herself to get 
in touch with him in what she called the beyond. He came home 
six weeks after Adam was born. His right leg was off at tlie 
knee. He stumped in on a crude wooden leg he himself had 
carved out of beechwood. And already it was splitting. He had 
in his pocket and placed on the parlour table the lead bullet they 
had given him to bite while they cut off his frayed leg. 

Adam’s father Cyrus was something of a devil -had always 
been wild — drove a two-wheeled cart too fast, and managed to 
make his wooden leg seem jaunty and desirable. He had enjoyed 
his military career, what there was of it. Being wild by nature,' 
he had liked his brief period of training and the drinking and 
gambling and whoring that went with it. Then he marched 
south with a group of replacements, and he enjoyed that too- 
seeing the country and stealing chickens and chasing rebel girls 
up into the haystacks. The grey, despairing weariness of pro- 
tracted manoeuvres and combat did not touch him. The first 
time he saw the enemy was at eight o’clock one spring morning, 
and at eight-thirty he was hit in the right leg by a hea\Tr slug 
that mashed and splintered the bones beyond repair. Even then 
he was lucky, for the rebels retreated and the field surgeons^ 
moved up immediately. Cyrus Trask did have his five minutes ' 
of horror while they cut the shreds away and sawed the bone off 
square and burned the open flesh. The tooth-marks in the bul- 
let proved that. And there was considerable pain while the 
wound healed under the unusually septic conditions in the hos- 
pitals of that day. Tut Cyrus had vitality and swagger. While he 
was carving his beechwood leg and hobbling about on a crutch, 
he contracted a particularly virulent dose of the clap from a 
. negro girl who whistled at him from under a pile of lumber and 
charged him ten cents. When he had his new leg, and painfully 
knew his condition, he hobbled about for days, looking for the 

17 



girl. He told his bunk-mates xvhat he was going to do when he 
found her. He planned to cut off her ears and her nose with his , 
pocket-knife and get his money back. Carving on his ¦ wooden- 
leg he showed his friends how he would cut her. ‘When I finish 
her she’ll be a funny-looking bitch/ he said. ‘I’ll make her so a 
drunk Indian won’t take out after her.’ His ligHt-of-lovc must 
have sensed his intentionSj for he never found her. By the time 
Cyrus was released from the hospital and the army, his gonor- 
rhea was dried up. When he got home to Connecticut there re- 
mained only enough of it for his wife. 

Mrs Trask was a pale, inside-herself woman. No heat of sun 
ever, reddened her cheeks, and no open laughter raised the cor- 
ners of her mouth. She used religion as a therapy for the ills' of 
the world and of herself, and she changed the reh'gion to fit the 
ill. When sh'e found that the theosophy she had developed for 
communication with a dead husband was not necessary, she cast 
about for some new unhappiness. Her search was quickly re- 
warded by the infection Cyrus brought home from the war. And 
as soon as she was aware that a condition existed, she devised a 
new theolog)’. Her god of commumcation" became a god of ven- 
' geance-to her the most satisfactor>’ deity she had devised so far 
-and, as it nimed out, the last. It was quite easy for her to 
attribute her condition to cenain dreams she had experienced 
while her husband was away. But the disease was not punish- 
ment enough for her nocturnal philandering. Her new god was 
an expert in pumshment. He demanded of her a sacrifice. She 

egotistical humility and' 
almost happily amved at the sacrifice - herself . It took her wo 
w^ks to write her last letters with revisions and corrected spell- 
mg. In It she confessed to crimes she could not possibly have 
committed and admitted faults far beyond her capacity 2td' 
then’ dressed in a secretly made shroud, she went out on a 
¦moonbght mght and drmvned herself in a pond so shaUoxv^that 
she had to get down on her knees in the mud and hold her head 
under water. Tins required great will-power. As the warm un ' 
consaousn^s finaUy crept over her. she was thinking 
citation of how her white lawn shroud would have mud down 
thmfront when they pulled her out in the morning. And it did 
mourned for his wife with a keg of whiskx' and 
¦ ° ^ fnends who had dropped in on their wavlinmp 

wakf '^eal at the beginnin Jof the 

m ted h- about babies, had nLecied 

feed him. Cjtus soon solved the problem. He dipped a^rag in 

18 



whisky and gave it to the baby to suck, and after three or four 
dippings young Adam went to sleep. Several times during the 
mourning period he awakened and complained and. got the 
dipped rag again and went to sleep. The baby was drunk for two 
days and a half. Whatever may have happened in his developing 
brain, it proved beneficial to his metabolism ; front that Uvo and 
a half days he gained an iron health. And when, at the end of 
three da3^s his father finally went out and bought a goat, Adam 
drank the milk greedily, vomited, drank more, and was on his 
-way. His father did not find the reaction alarming, since he was 
doing the same thing. ¦ ' ¦ ¦¦ 

Within a month Cjtus Trask’s choice fell on the seventeen- 
year-old daughter of a neighbouring farmer. The courtship was 
quick and realistic. There was no doubt in anybody’s' mind 
about his intentions. They were honourable and reasonable. Her 
father abetted the courtship. He had two younger daughters, and 
Alice, the eldest, was seventeen. This was her first proposal. 

Cyrus wanted a woman to take care of Adam. He needed 
someone to keep house and cook, and a servant cost money. He 
was a vigorous man and needed the body of a woman, and that 
too cost monej'- unless j’Ou were married to it. Within two' 
weeks Cyrus had wooed, wedded, bedded, and impregnated her. . 
His neighbours did not find his action hasty. It was quite nor- , 
mal in that day for a man to use up three or four tvives in a 



,roof of his soldiering.and a guarantee 
lave to do it again. Timidly' he began 

iampaigns, but as his technique grew so did his battik. At the 
i^ery first -he, knew be was lying, but it was not long before he 
was equally sure that every one of his stories was true. Before he 
had entered the service he had not been much interested in war- 
fare; now he bought every book about war, read every report, 
subscribed to the New. York papers, snidied maps. His know- 
ledge of geography had been shaky and his infonnation about 
tiie fighting non-existent; now he became an authority. He lutew 
not only the battles, movements, campaigns, but also the units 
involved, down to the regiments, their colonels', and where they 
originated. And from telling he became convinced that he had 


been there. 

All of this was a gradual dei’dopment, and it took place while 
Adam was growing to boyhood and his young half-brother be- 
liind him. Adam and little Charles would sit silent and respect-, 
ful' while their father e-xplained how every general thought and 
planned and where they had made their mistakes and what they 
should have done. And then -he had known it at the time- he- 


had told Grant and McClellan where they were wrong and had 
'• begged them to take his analysis of the situation. Inv'ariably they 
¦ dused his advice and only afterwards was he proved right. 

There was one thing Cyrus did not do, and perliaps it was 
clever of him. He never once promoted himself to non-commis- 
sioned rank. Private Trask he began, and Private Trask he re- 
mained. In the total telling, it made him at once tlie most mobile 
and ubiquitous private in the history of warfare. It made it 
necessarj' for him to be in as many as four places at once. Blit 
perhaps instinctively he did not tell those stories close to each 
other. Alice and the boys had a complete picture of him : a pri- 
vate soldier, and proud of it, who not only happened to be 
where every spectacular and important action was taking place 
but who wandered freely into staff meetings and joined or dis- 
sented in the decisions of general officers. 

The death of Lincoln caught Cyrus in the pit of the stomach. 
Always he remembered how he felt when he first heard the news. 
And he could never mention it or hear of it without quick tears 
in his eyes. And while he never actually said it, juu got the in- 
dffitructible impression that Private Cyrus Trask was one of 
Lmcoln’s closest, warmest, and most trusted friends. When Mr 
Lincoln wanted to know about the army, the real army, not those 
prancing dummies in gold braid, he turned to Private Trask. 


an 



Quite early he began to write letters and then articles about' 
the conduct of the war, and his conclusions were intelligent and 
convincing. Indeed, Cyrus developed an excellent military mind. 
His criticisms both of the war as it had been conducted and of 
the army organization as it persisted were irresistibly penetrat- 
ing. His articles in various magazines attracted attention. His 
letters to the War Department, printed simultaneously ‘.in the 
newspapers, began- to have a sharp effect in decisions on th? 
army. Perhaps if the Grand Army of the Republic had not as- 
sumed political force and direction his voice might not have 
been heard so clearly in Washington, but the spokesman for a 
block of nearly a million men was not to be ignored. And such a 
voice in military matters Cyrus Trask became. It came about 
that he was consulted in matters of army organization, in officer 
relationships, in personnel and equipment. His expertness was 
apparent to everyone who heard him. He had a genius for the 
military. More than that, he was one of those responsible for the 
organization of the GAR as a cohesive and potent force in the 
national life. After several unpaid offices in that organization, he 
took a paid secrctarj'ship which he kept for the rest of his life. 
He travelled from one end of the country to the other, attending 
conventions, meetings, and encampments. So much for his pub- 
lic life. 

His private life was also laced through tvith his new profes- 
sion, He was a man devoted. His house and farm he organized 
on military basis. He demanded and got reports on the con- 
duct of his private economy. It is probable that Alice preferred 
it this way. She was not a talker. A terse report was easiest for 
her. She was busy with the growing boys and with keeping the - 
house clean and the clothes washed. Also, she had to conserve her 
energy, though she did not mention this, in any of her reports. 
Without warning her energy would leave her, and she would 
have to sit down and wait until it came back. In the night she 
would be drenched with perspiration. She knew perfectly well 
that she had what was called consumption, would have known 
even if she v/as not reminded by a hard, exhausting cough. And 
she did not know how long she would live; Some people wasted 
on for quite a few years. There wasn’t any rule about it. Per- 
haps she -didn’t dare to mention it to her husband. He had 

¦ 21 , ' • ' 



levised a method of dealing with sickness which resembled, 
mnishment. A stomach-ache was treated with a purge so yio-' . 
ent that it was a wonder anyone survived it. If she had men- 
ioned her condition, Cyrus might- have started a treatment 
which would have kiUed her off before her consumption could 
iiavc dohedt. Besides, as Cyrus became more military, his wife 
learned the only technique through which a soldier can survive. , 
She never made herself noticeable, never spoke unless spoken to, 
performed tyhat was expected and no more, and tried for no 
promotions. She became a rear rank private. It was much easier , 
that w'ay. Alice retired to the background until she was .barely, 
visible at all. , 

It w^ the little boys who really caught it. Cj'rus had decided 
that even though the army was not perfect, it was still the only 
¦honourable profession for a man. He mourned the fact that he 
could not be a permanent soldier because of his wooden leg, but, 
he could not imagine any career for his sons except the army. 
.-He felt a man should learn soldiering from the ranks, as he had. 
Then he would know what it was about from experience, not 
from charts and textbooks. He taught them the manual of arms 
when they could barely w'alk. By the time they were in grade 
school, close-order drill was as natural as breathing and as hate-; 

, ful as hell. He kept them hard with exercises, beating out the 
' rhythm with a stick on liis wooden leg. He made them walk for 
miles, carrying knapsacks loaded with stones to make their 
shoulders strong. He worked constantly on tlieir marksmanshi;^' 
in the wood-lot behind the house. 

1 1 

When a ciiild first catches adults out - when it first walks into 
his grave little head that adults do not have divine intelligence, 
that their judgements are not always wise, tlieir thinking true, 
their. sentences just -his world falls into panic desolation. The 
gods are fallen and all safety gone. And there is one sure thing 
about the fall of gods : they do not fall a little; they crash and 
shatter -or sink deeply into green muck. It is a tedious job to 
build them up apin; they never quite shine. And the chOd’s 
world is never quite whole again. It is an aching kind of growing. 

Adam found his father out. It trasn’t tliat his father changed, 
but tlwt some new quality came to Adam. He had always hated 
the discipline, as cv-ery normal animal does, but it was just' and 
true and inevitable as measles, not to be denied or cursed, only 

22 


to ^ hated. And then -it was very fast, almost a click in the ¦ 
brain -Adam knew that, for him at least, his father’s methods 
had no reference to anj'thing in the world but his father. The 
teclmiques and training were not designed for the boys at all buf ¦ 
only to make Cyrus a great man. And the same click in the brain ¦¦ 
told Adam that his father was not a great man, that he was, in- 
deed, a very strong-willed and concentrated little man wearing a ¦ 
huge busby. Who knows what causes this -a look in the eye, a, 
lie found out, a moment of hesitation? — then god comes crash- 
ing down in a child’s brain. 

Young Adam was always an obedient child. Something in him .. • 
shrank from violence, from contention, from the silent shrieking 
tensions that can rip at a house. He contributed to the quiet he 
wished for by offering no violence, no contention and to do this 
he had to retire into secretness, since there is some violence in' 
everyone. He covered his life with a veil of vagueness, while be- 
hind his quiet eyes a rich full life went on. This did not protect 
him from assault but it allowed him an immimity. 

His half-brother, Charles, only a little over a year younger, 
grew up with his father’s assertiveness. Charles was- a natural 
athlete, with instinctive timing and co-ordination and the com- 
petitor's will to win over others, which makes for success in the ' 
world. 

Young Charles won all contests with Adam whether they in- 
volved skill, or strength, or quick intelh'gence, and won them so 
easily that quite early he lost interest and had to find his com- 
petition among other children. Thus it came about that a kind 
of affection grew between 'the two boys, but it was more like an 
association between brother and sister than between brothers. 
Charles fought any boy who challenged or slurred Adam and 
usually won. He protected Adam from his father’s harsliness 
with lies and even with blame-taking. Charles felt for his bro- 
ther the affection one has for helpless things, for blind puppies 
and new babies. 

Adam looked out of his covered brain — out of the long tunnels 
of his eyes -at the people of his world. His father, a one-legged 
natural -force at first, installed justly .to make little boys feel 
littler and stupid boys aware of their stupidity; and then -after 
god had crashed — he saw his father as the policeman laid on by 
birth, the officer who might be circumvented, or fobled, but.. 
¦ne\’er challenged. And out of the long tunnels of his eyes.Adam 
say his half-brother Charles as a bright being of anothr les, 
gifted with muscle and bone, speed and alerta^s. < a 

23 



different plane, to be admired as one admires the sleek lazy 
danger of a black leopard, not by any chance to be compared 
with oneself. And it would' no more have occurred to Adam to 
confide in his brother -to tell him the hunger, the grey dreams, 

¦ the plans and silent pleasures that lay at the back of the tun- 
nelled eyes r than to share his thoughts with a lovely tree or a 
pheasant in fiigjht. Adam was glad of Charles the way a woman 
is glad of a fat diamond, and he depended on his brother in the 
way that same woman depends on the diamond’s glitter and the 
self-security tied up in its worth; but love, affection, empathj',- 
were beyond conception. 

. Towards Alice Trask, Adam concealed a feeling that was akin 
to a warm shame. She was not his mother— that he knew because 
he had been told many times. Not from things said but from the 

¦ tone in which other things were said, he knew that he had once 
had a mother and that she had done some shameful thing, such 
as forgetting the chickens or missing the target on the range in 
the wood-lot. And as a result of her fault she was not here., 
Adam thought sometimes that if he could only find out what sin 

. it was she had committed, why, he would sin it too - and not be 
here. 

Alice treated the boys equally, washed them and fed them, 
and left everything else to their father, who had let it be known 
clearly and witli finality that training the boys physically and 
' mentally was his exclusive province. Even praise and reprimand 
he would not delegate. Alice never complained, quarrelled, 
laughed, or cried. Her mouth was trained to a line that con- 
cealed nothing and offered notliing too. But once when Adam 

¦ was quite small he wandered silently into the kitchen. Alice did 
not see him. She was darning socks and she was smiling. Adam 
retired secretly and wall;ed out of the house and into the wood- 

, lot to a sheltered place behind a stump that he knew well. He 
settled deep between the protecting roots. Adam was as shocked 
as though he had come upon her naked. He breathed excitedly, 
high against his throat. For Alice had been naked - she had been 
smiling. He wonderefd how she had dared such wantonness. And 
he ached towards her with a longing tliat was passionate and 
hot. He did not know what it was about, but all the long lack of 
holding, of rocking, of caressing, the hunger for breast and 
nipple, and the softness of a lap, and the voice-tone of love and 
compassion, and the sweet feeling of anxiety - all these were in 
his passion, and he did not know it because he did not know that 
such things existed, so how could he miss them. 

24 



Of course it occurred to him that he might be wrong, that 
some misbegotten shadow had fallen across his face and warped 
his seeing. And so he cast back to the sharp picture in his head 
and knew that the eyes were smiling too. Twisted li^t could do ¦ 
one or the other but not both. 

He stalked her then, game-wise, as he had the woodchucks on 
the knoll when day after day he had lain lifeless as a young 
stone and watched the old wary chucks bring their children out 
to sun. He spied on Alice, hidden, and from tmsuspected eye- 
corner, and it was true. Sometimes when she was alone, and 
knew she was alone, she permitted her mind to play in a garden, 
and she smiled. And it was wonderful to see how quickly she ; 
could drive the smile to earth the way the woodchucks holed- 
their children. 

Adam concealed his treasure deep in his tunnels, but he was • 
inclined to pay for his pleasiure with something. Alice began to 
find gifts -in her sewing basket, in her w’om-out purse, under 
her pillow’ — two cinnamon pinks, a bluebird’s tail-feather, half 
a stick of green sealing wax, a stolen handkerchief. At first Alice 
was startled, but then that passed, and when she found some un- 
suspected present the garden smile flashed and disappeared the 
way a trout crosses a knife of sunshine in a pool. She asked no 
questions and made no comment. 

Her coughing was very bad at night, so loud and disturbing 
that CjTus had at last to put her in another room or he would 
have got no sleep. But he did visit her very of ten - hopping on 
his one bare foot, steadying himself w’ith hand on w'all. The boys 
could hear and feel the jar of his body through the house as he 
hopped to and from Alice’s bed. 

As Adam grew he feared one thing more than any other. He 
feared the day he would be taken and enlisted in the army. His 
father never let him forget that such a time would come. He 
spoke of it often. It w'as Adam who needed the army to make a ' 
man of him. Charles was pretty near a man already. And Charles 
was a man, and a dangerous man, even at fifteen, and w’hen 
Adam was sixteen. 



pointed stick was laid on the ground, then struck near one end 
with a bat. The small stick flew into the air and then was batted 
as far as possible. 

Adam was not good at games. But by some accident of eye 
and timing he beat his brother at peewee. Four times he drove 
the peewee farther than Charles did. It was a new experience to 
him, and a wild flush came over him, so that he did not watch 
and feel, out his brother’s mood as he usually did. The fifth time 
he drove the peewee it flew humming like a bee far out in the 
field. He turned happily to face Charles and suddenly he froze 
. deep in his chest. The hatred in Charles’s face frightened him, 
‘I guess it was just an accident,’ he said lamely. ‘I bet I couldn’t 


do, it again.’ 

Charles set his peewee, struck it, and, as it rose into the air, , 
struck at it and missed. Charles moved slowly towards. Adam, 
his eyes cold and non-committaL Adam edged away in terror. 
He did not dare to turn and run, for his brother could outrun 
him. He backed slowly away, his eyes frightened and Ms throat 
dry. Charles moved close and struck him in the face with his ’ 
bat. Adam covered his bleeding nose with his hands, and Charles 
swung his bat and hit him in the ribs, knocked the wind out of 
him, swung at his head and knocked him out. And as Adam lay 
unconscious on the ground Charles kicked him heavily in the 
stomach and walked away. 

After a while Adam became conscious. He breathed shallowly 
because his chest hurt. He tried to sit up and fell back at the 
wrench of the torn muscles over his stomach. He saw AUce look- 
ing out, and there was somethmg in her face that he had never 
seen before. He did not know what it was, but it was not soft or 
weak, and it might be hatred. She saw that he'was looking at 
her, dropped the curtains into place, and disappeared. When , 
Adam finally got up from the ground and moved, bent over, into 
, the kitchen, he found a basin of hot water standing ready for 
him and a clean towel beside it. He could hear his step-mother 
coughing in her room. 


Charles had one great quality. He was never sorry -ever. He 
ne\'er mentioned the beating, apparently nev'er thought of it, 
again. But Adam made very sure that he didn’t win again - at 
anything. He had always felt the danger in his brother, but now 
he understood that he must never win unless he was prepared to 
kill Charles. Charles was not sorry. He had very simply fulfilled 
himself. 


Charles did not tell his father about the beating, and Adam 


26 



did not, and surety Alice did not, and yet he seemed to know. 
In the months that followed he turned a gentleness on Adani. 
His speech became softer towards him. He did not punish him 
any more. Almost nightly he lectured him, but not violently. 
And Adam was more afraid of the gentleness than he had been 
at the violence, for it seemed to him that he was being trained 
as a sacrifice, almost as though he was being subjected to kind- 
ness before death, the way victims intended for the gods were 
cuddled and flattered so that they might go happily to the stone 
and not outrage the gods with unhappiness. 

Cyrus explained softly to Adam the nature of a soldier. And 
though his knowledge came from research rather than experi- 
ence, he knew and he was accurate. He told his son of the sad 
dignity that can belong to a soldier, how he is, necessary in the 
light of all the failures of man -the penalty of our frailties. Per- 
haps Cyrus discovered these things in himself as he told them. 
It was very different from the flag-waving, shouting bellicosity 
of his younger days. The humilities are piled on a soldier, so 
Cyrus said, in order that he may, when the time comes, be not 
too resentful of the final humility -a meaningless and dirty 
death. And Cyrus talked to Adam alone and did not permit 
Charles to listen. 

Cyrus took Adam to walk with him one late afternoon, and 
the black conclusions of all of his study and his thinking came 
out and flowed with a kind of thick terror over his son. He said, 
‘I’ll have you know that a soldier is the most holy of all humans 
because he is the most tested -most tested of all. I’ll try to tell 
you. Look now — in all of history men have been taught that 
killing of men is an evil thing not to be cotmtenanced. Any man 
who lulls must be destroyed because this is a great sin, maybe 
the worst sin we know. And then we take a soldier and put mur- 
der in his hands and we say to him, “Use it well, use it wisely.” 
We put no checks on him. Go out and kill as miny of a certain 
kind or classification of your brothers as you can. And we 
\vill revvard you for it because it is a violation of your early 
training.’ 

Adam wet his dry lips and tried to ask and failed and tried 
again. ‘Why do they have to do it?’ he said. “Why is it?’ 

Cyrus was deeply moved and he spoke as he had never spoken 
before. ‘I don’t know,’ he' said. T’ve studied and maybe learned 
how things are, but I’m not even close to why, they are. And you 
must not expect to find that people understand ^vhat they do. 
¦So many things are done instinctivdy, the way a bee m^es 

27 



pointed stick was laid on the ground, then struck near one end ’ 
with a bat. The small stick flew into the air and then w'as batted 

as far as possible. ¦ c 

¦ Adam was not good at games. But by some accident of eye 
and timing he beat his brother at peewee. Four times, he drove 
the peewee farther than. Charles did. It was a new ^penence to 
him, and a wild flush came over him, so that he did not watch 
anddeel out his brother’s mood as he usually did. The fifth time . 
he drove the peewee it flew humming like a bee far out in the 
field. He turned happily to face Charles and suddenly he froze 
. deep in his chest. The hatred in Charles’s face frightened him. , 
‘I guess it was just an accident,’ he said lamely. ‘I bet I couldn’t 
do it again.’ ¦ 

' Charles set his peewee, struck it, and, as it rose into the air, 
struck at it and missed. Charles moved slowly towards Adam, 
his eyes cold and non-committal. Adam edged away in terror. 

He did not dare to turn and run, for his brother could outrun 
him. He backed slowly away, his eyes frightened and Iiis throat 
dry. Charles mov'ed close and struck him in the face with his • 
bat. Adam covered his bleeding nose with his hands, and Charles 
swung his bat and hit him in the ribs, knocked the wind out of- , 
him, swung at liis head and knocked him out. And as Adam lay . 
unconscious on the ground Charles kicked him heavily in the 
stomach and walked away. 

After a while Adam became conscious. He breathed shallowly 
because his chest hurt. He tried to sit up and fell back at the 
wrench of the torn muscles over his stomach. He saw Alice look- 
ing out, and there was something in her face that he had never 
seen before. He did not know what it was, but it was not soft or 
weak, and it might be hatred. She saw that he-was looking at 
her, dropped the curtains into place, and disappeared. When 
Adam finally got up from the ground and moved, bent over, into 
the kitchen, he found a basin of hot water standing ready for 
him and a clean towel beside it. He could hear his step-mother 
coughing in her room. . ' 

Charles had one great quality. He was never sorry -ever. ^ 
never mentioned the beating, apparently never thought of Ii" 
again. But Adam made very sure that he didn’t win again - « 
annulling. He had always felt the danger in his brother, but jio 
he understood that he must never win unless he was prepared 
kill Charles. Charles was not sorry. He had very simplv fidfu 
himself. 

Cliarles did not tell his father about the beating, and A 

26 



were, b^use- because they have lost a littleness of vanity and 
have gained all the gold of the companj' and the regiment.- If ’ 
you can go dowm so low, you will be able to rise higher than you 
can conceive, and you will know a holy joy, a companionship 
almost like that of a heavenly company of angels. Then you will 
know the quality of men even if the\' are inarticulate. But until 
you have gone way douni you can ne\'er know this.' 

As they walked back towards the house C3rrus turned left and 
entered the wood-lot among the trees, and it was dusk. Suddenly 
Adam said, ‘You see that stump there, sir? I used to hide be- 
tween the roots on the far side. After you punished me I used to 
hide there, and sometimes I went there just because I felt bad.'’ 

‘Let’s go and see the place,’ his father said. Adam led him to 
it, and Cyrus looked down at the nest-like hole between the • 
roots. ‘I knew about it long ago,’ he said. ‘Once when you were 
gone a long time I thought you must have such a place, and I 
found it because I felt the kind of a place you would need. See 
how the earth is tamped and the little grass is tom? And while 
you sat in there you stripped little pieces of bark to shreds. I 
knew it was the place v/hen I came upon it.’ 

Adam was staring at his father in wonder. ‘You never came 
here loolnng for me,’ he said. 

‘No,’ CiTus repUed. ‘I wouldn’t do that. You can drive a 
human too far. I wouldn’t do that. Alwaj's you must leave a man 
one escape before death. Remember that! I knew, I guess, how 
hard I was pressing you. I didn’t want to push 5'ou over the 
edge.’ 

They moved restlessly off through the trees. Cyrus said, ‘So 
many things I want to tell you. I’ll forget most of them. I vrant 
to tell 5*ou that a soldier' gives up so much to get something 
back. From the day of a child’s birth be is taught by every cir- 
cumstance, by every' law and rule and right, to protect his own 
life. He starts with that great instinct, and everything confirms 
it. And then he is a soldier and he must leam to wolate all of 
this — he must leam coldly' to put himself in the way of losing 
his own life without going mad. And if you can do that -and, 
mind you, Tome can’t— then you will have the greatest gift of 
all. Look, son,’ Cyrus said earnestly, ‘nearly all men are afraid, 
and they don’t even know what^causes their fear -shadows, per- 
plexities, dangers without names or numbers, fear of a faceless 
death. But if you can bring yourself to face not shadows but real 
death, described and recognizable, by bullet or sabre, arrow or 
lance, then you need never be afraid again, at least not in the- 

29 



Wey or a fox dips:his paws in a stream, to fool dogs. A fox 
ain’t say why he does it, and what bee remembers winter or ex- 
¦ peers it to come again? When I knew you had to go I thought 
to leave the future open so you could dig out 5'our own findings, 
and then it seemed better if I could protect you with the little I 
know. You’ll go in soon now - you’ve come to the age. - . 

“I don’t want to,’, said Adam quickly. , ^ ; _ 

‘You’ll go in soon,’ his father went on, not hearing. ‘And I 
' want .to-tell you so you won’t be surprised. They’ll first strip off ' 
your clothes; but they’ll go deeper than that. They’lh shuck off 
any ' little dignity you have - you’ll lose what you think of as 
' your decent right to live and to be let alone to live. The5r’ll make 
you -live and eat and sleep and shit close to other men. And when 
-¦ they dress you up again you’ll not be able to tell yourself from 
the others. You can’t even wear a scrap or pin a note on your 
breast to say, “This is me - separate from the rest.” ’ 

‘I don’t want to do it,’ said Adam. 

‘After a while,’ said Cyrus, ‘you’ll think no thought the others 
do not think. You’ll know no word the others can’t say. And 
you’ll do things because the others do them. You’ll fed the dan- 
ger in any difference whatever -a danger to the whole crowd of 
like-thinking, like-acting men.’ 

‘What if I don’t?’ Adam demanded. 


\ ‘Yes,’ said Cyrus, ‘sometimes that happens. Once in a while ¦ 
there is a man who won’t do what is demanded of him, and do 
you know what happens? The whole machine devotes itself 
coldly to the destruction of his difference. They’ll beat your 
spirit and your nerves, your body and your mind, with iron rods 
until the dangerous difference goes out of you. if you can’t 
finally give in, they’ll vomit you up and .leave you stinking out- 
side -neither part of themselves nor yet free. It’s better to fall in 
with them. They only do it to protect themselves. A , thing so 
triumphantly illogical, so beautifully senseless as an army can’t 
allow a question to weaken it. Witliin itself, if you do not hold 
it up to other things for comparison and derision, you’ll firid. 
slowly, surely, a reason and a logic and a kind of dreadful, 
beauty. A man who can accept it is not a worse man always, and 
sometimes is a much better man. Pay good heed to me, for I 
Iiave .thought long about it. Some men there are who go down 
the dismal wrack of soldiering, surrender themselves and become 
faceless. But these had not much face to start with. And maybe 
you’re like that. But there are others who go down, submerge in 
die common slough, and then rise more themselves than they 


28 


were, because -because they have lost a littleness of vanity and 
have gained all the gold of the company and tire regiment. If 
you can go down so low, you vdll be able to rise higher than you 
can conceive, arid you will know a holy joy, a companionship 
almost hke that of a heavenly company of angels. Then j’ou will 
know the quality of men even if they are inarticulate. But until 
you have gone way down you can never know this.’ 

As tliey walked back towards the house Cjttus turned left and 
entered the wood-lot among the trees, and it was dusk. Suddenly 
Adam said, ‘You see that stump there, sir? I used to hide be- 
tween the roots on the far side. After you pimished me I used to 
hide there, and sometimes I went there Just because I felt bad;’ 

‘Let’s go and see the place,’ his father said. Adam led him to 
it, and Cyrus looked down at the nest-like hole between the 
roots. ‘I knew about it long ago,’ he said. ‘Once when you were 
gone a long time I thought you must have such a place, and I 
found it because I felt the kind of a place you would need. See 
how tire earth is tamped and the little grass is torn? And while 
you sat in there you stripped little pieces of bark to shreds. I 
knew it was the place when I came upon it.’ 

Adam was staring at his fatlrcr in wonder. ‘You never came 
here looking for me,’ he said. 

‘No,’ CjTUS replied. ‘I wouldn’t do that. You can drive a 
human too far. I wouldn’t do that. Always you must leave a man 
one escape before death. Remember that! I knew, I guess, how 
hard I was pressing j'ou. I didn’t want to push you over the 
edge.’ 

They moved restlessly off through the trees. Cjtus said, ‘So 
many things I want to tell you. I’ll forget most of them. I want 
to tell you that a soldier' gives up so much to get something 
back. From the day of a child’s birth he is taught by every cir- 
cumstance, by every law and rule and right, to protect his own 
life. He starts with that great instinct, and everything confirms 
it. And then he is a soldier and he must learn to violate all of 
this -he must learn coldly to put himself in the way o'f losing 
his own life without going mad. And if you can do that -and, 
mind you, some can’t - then you will have the greatest gift of 
all. Look, son,’ Cyrus said earnestly, ‘nearly all men are afraid, 
and they don’t even know what^causes their fear - shadows, per- 
plexities, dangem without names or numbers, fear of a faceless 
death. But if you can bring yourself to face not shadows but real 
death, described and recognizable, by bullet or sabre, arrow or 
lance, then you need never be afraid again, at least not in the 

29 



same way you were before. Then .you wUI be a man set apart 
from other men, safe where other men may crj' m terror. This is 
the great reward. Maybe this is the only reward. Maybe this is 
the final purity' aU ringed with filth. It’s nearly dark. I’U W'ant to 
talk to'you again tomorrow night when both of us have thought 

about what I’ve told you.’ ^ \ 

But Adam said, . ‘Why don’t you talk to my brother? Charles 
will be going. He’ll be good at it, much better than I am.’ 

‘Charles vvon’t be going,’ Cyrus said. ‘There’d be no point in 


it.’ ' 

' ‘But'he would be a better soldier.’ , ” 

‘Only outside on his skin,’ said Cyrus. ‘Not inside. Charles is 
not afraid, so .he could never learn anything about courage. He . 
does not know anything outside himself, so he could never gain 
the Aings I’ve tried to explain to you. To put him in an army 
would be . to let loose things which in Charles must be chained 
¦ down, not let loose. I would not dare to let him go.’ 

Adam complained, ‘You never punished him, j'ou let him live ¦ 
his own life, you praised him, you did not haze him, and now 
. you let him stay out of the army.’ He stopped, frightened, at 
what he had said, afraid of the rage or the contempt or the vio- 
lence his words might let loose. 

His father did not reply. He walked on out of the wood-lot, . 
and his head hung down so that his chin rested on his chest, and 
rise and fall of his hip when his wooden leg struck the 
iijound was monotonous. The wood leg made a side-semicircle 
' . to get ahead when its turn came. 

It was completely dark by now, and the golden light of. the 
lamps shone out from the open kitchen window. Alice came to 
the doorway and peered out, looking for them, and then she 
heard the uneven footsteps approaching and went back to the 
kitchen. 

Cyrus walked to the kitchen stoop before he stopped and 
raised his head. ‘Where are you?’ he asked. 

'Here - right behind you - right here.’ 

‘You asked a question. I guess I’ll have to answer. Maybe it’s 
good and maybe it’s bad to answer. You’re not clever. You don’t 
know what you want. You have no proper fierceness. You let 
other people walk over you. Sometimes I think 5'ou’re a weakling 
who will never amount to a dog turd. Does that answer your 
question? I loVe you better. I always have. This may be a bad 
thing to tell you, but it s true. I love you better. Else why would 
I have given myself the trouble of hurting you? Now shut your 


30 



moutli and go to your supper. I’ll talk to you tomorrow night. 
My leg aches.’ 


IV 

There was no talk at supper. The quiet was disturbed only by 
the slup of soup and gnash of chewing, and his father waved 
his hand to try to drive the moths away from the chimney of the 
kerosene lamp. Adam thought his broker watched him secretly. 
And he caught an eye-flash from Alice when he looked up sud- 
denly. After he had finished eating, Adam pushed back his chair. 
‘I think I’ll go for a walk,’ he said. 

Charles stood up. ‘I’ll go with you.’ 

Alice and Cyrus watched them go out of the door, and then. 
she asked one of her rare questions. She asked nervously, ‘What 
did you do?’ 

‘Nothing,’ he said. 

‘Will you make him go?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Does he know?’ 

Cyrus stared bleakly out of the open door into the darkness. 
‘Yes, he knows.’ 

‘He won’t like it. It’s not right for him.’ 

‘It doesn’t matter,’ Cj'rus said, and he repeated loudly, ‘It 
doesn’t matter,’ and his tone said, ‘Shut your mouth. This is not 
your affair.’ They were silent a moment, and then he said almost 
in a tone of apologj', ‘It isn’t as though he were your child.’ 
Alice did not reply. 

The boys walked down the dark rutty road. Ahead they could 
see a few pinched lights where the village was. 

‘Want to go in and see if an)n:hing’s stirring at the inn?’ 
Charles asked. 

‘I hadn’t thought of it,’ said Adam. 

‘Then what the hell are you walking out at night for?’ 

‘You didn’t have to come,’ said Adam. 

Charles moved close to him. ‘What did he say to you this 
afternoon? I saw you walking together. What did he say?’ 

‘He just talked about the army - like always.’ 

‘Didn’t look like that to me;’ Charles said suspiciously. ‘I 
him leaning close, talking the way he talks to men — not telling, 

talking.’ ’ ' 

‘He was telling,’ Adam said patiently, and he had to. control 
his breath, for a little fear had begun to pr^s up against his 

¦ 31 - ¦ ' 



stomacli; He took as deep a gulp of air as he could and held it to 

push back at the fear., • ' ¦ . j • ' 

‘What did he tell you?’ Cltarles demanded again. 

‘About the army and how it is to be a soldier. 

‘I don’t believe you,’ said Charles. ‘I think you’re a goddam 
mealy-mouthed liar. What’re you trying to get away with?’ , , 
.‘Nothing,’ said Adam. . . ' 

¦ Charles said harshly, 'Your crazy moAer drowned herself. 
- Maybe she took a look at you. That’d do it.’ 

Adam let out his breath gently, pressing dowm the dismal fear. 


He was silent. 

Charles cried, ‘You’re trying to take him away! I don t know 
how you’re going about it. What do you think you’re doing?’ 

‘Nothing,’ said Adam. 

' Charles jumped in front of him so that Adam had to stop, liis 
chKt almost against his brother’s chest. Adam backed away, but 
^carefully, as one backs away from a snake, 

‘Look at his birthday ! ’ Charles shouted. ‘I took six bits and I 
bought him a knife made in Germany - three blades and a corkr 
screw, pearl-handled. Where’s that knife? Do you ever see him 
use it? Did he give it to you? I never even saw him hone it. 
Have you got that knife in your pocket? What did he do with 
it? “'nianks,” he said, like that. And that’s the last I heard of a 
X pearl-handled German knife that cost six bits.’ 

' Rage was in his voice and Adam felt the creqiing feari but 

e knev,' also that he had a moment left. Too many times he had 
seen the destructive machine that chopped dorni anything 
standing in its way. Rage came first and then a coldness, a pos- 
session; non-committal eyes and a pleased smile and no voice at 
all, only a whisper. When that happened murder was on- the 
way, but cool, deft murder, and hands that worked precisely, 
delicately, Adam swallowed saliva to dampen his dry throat. He 
could thixdc of nothing to say that would be heard, for once in 
rage bis brother would not listen, would not even hear. He 
bulked darkly in front of Adam, shorter, wider, thicker, but 
still not crouched. In the starlight his lips shone with wetness, 
but there was no smile yet and his voice still raged. 

‘What did you do on his birthday? You think I didn’t see? 
Did you spend sLx bits or even four bits. You brought him a 
rnongrel pup you had picked up in the wood-lot. You laughed 
like a fool and said it would make a good bird dog. That dog 
sleeps in his room. He plays with it while he’s reading. He’s got 
it all trained. And where’s the knife? "Thanks," he said, just 


32 



“Thanks”.’ Charles spoke in a whisper and his shoulders dropped. 

Adam made one desperate jump backwards and raised his 
liands to guard his face. His brother moved precisely, each foot 
' planted firmly. One fist lanced delicately to get the range, and 
then the bitter-frozen work-a mrd blow in the stomach, and 
Adam’s hands dropped; then four punches to the head. Adam 
felt the bone and gristle of his nose crunch. He raised his hands 
again and Charles drove at his heart. And all this time Adam 
looked at his brother as the condemned look hopelessly and 
puzzled at the executioner. 

Suddenly, to his own surprise, Adam launched a wild, over- 
hand, harmless swing which had neither force nor direction. 
Charles ducked in and imder it and the helpless arm went 
around his neck. Adam wrapped his arms around his brother 
and hung close to him, sobbing. He felt the square fists whip- 
ping nausea into his stomach and still he held on. Time was 
slowed to him. With his body he felt his brother move sideways 
to force his legs apart. And he felt the knee come up, past his 
knees, scraping his thighs, until it crashed against his testicles 
and flashing white pain ripped and echoed through his body. 
His arms let go. He bent over and vomited, while the cold killing 
went on. 

Adam felt the punches on temples, cheeks, eyes. He felt his lip 
split and tatter over his teeth, but his skin seemed thickened and 
dull, as tliough he were encased in heav^' rubber. Dully he won- 
dered why his legs did not buckle, why he did not fall, why un- 
consciousness did not" come to him. The punching continued 
eternally. He could hear his brother panting with the quick ex- 
plosive breath of a sledge-hammer man, and in the sick starlit 
dark he could see his brother tlirough the tear-watered blood 
that flowed from his eyes. He saw the innocent, non-committal 
eyes, the small smile on wet lips. And as he saw these things - a 
flash of light and darkness. 

Charles stood over him, gulping air like a run-out dog. And 
then he -turned and walked quickly back, towards the house, 
kneading his bruised Imuckles as he went. 

Consciousness came back quick and frightening to Adam. 
His mind rolled in a painful mist. His body was heavy and 
thick with hurt: But almost instantly he forgot his hurts. He 
-heard quick footsteps on the road. The instinctive fear and 
fierceness of a rat came over him. He pushed himself up on his 
knees and dragged himself off the road to the ditch that kept.it 
drained. There was a foot of water in the ditch, ap'^ tall 

33 



'mass grew up from its sides. Adam crawled quietly into the 
water, being very careful to. make no splash. , 

¦ The footsteps came close, slowed, moved on a little, catne 
back. From his. hiding-place Adam could see only a ^rkness m 
the dark. And then a. sulphur match was struck and burned a 
tiny blue until the wood caught, lighting his brother’s face gro- 
tesquely from , below. Charles raised the match and peered 
around, and Adam could see the hatchet in his right hand. 

When the, match went out the night was blacker than before. 
Charles moved slowly on and struck another match, and on and 
struck another. He searched the road for signs. At last he gave 
it up. His right hand rose and he threw the hatchet far off into 
. the field. He walked rapidly away towards the pinched lights of. 


the village. 

¦ ' For a long time Adam lay in the cool water. He wondered 
how Tiis', brother felt, wondered whether now that his passion 
was chilling he would feel panic or sorrow or sick consciehce or 
nothing. These things Adam felt for him. His conscience -bridged 
him to his brother and did his pain for him the way at other 
times he had done his homework. 

Adam crept out of the water and stood up. His hurts were 
stiffening and the blood was dried in a crust on his face. He, 
thought he would stay outside in the darkness until his father 
and Alice went to bed. He felt that he could not answer any 
1 questions, because he did not know any answers, and trying to 
find one was harsh to his battered mind. Dizziness edged with 
blue lights came fringing his forehead, and he knew that he 
would be fainting soon. 

He shuffled slowly up the road with wide-spread legs. At the 
stoop he paused, looked in. The lamp hanging by its chain from 
the ceiling cast a yellow circle and lighted Alice and her mend- 
ing-basket on the table in front of her. On the other side his' 
fatlier chewed a wooden pen and dipped it in an open ink bottle 
and made entries in his black record book. 

Alice, glancing up, saw Adam’s bloody face. Her liand rose to 
her mouth and her fingers hooked over her lower teeth. 

Adam drag-footed up one step and then the other and sup- 
ported himself in the doorway. 

Then Cjtus raised his head. He looked with a distant curi- 
osity. The identity of the distortion came to him slowly. He 
stood up, puzzled and wondering. He stuck the wooden pen in 
the ink bottle and wiped his fingers on his trousers. ‘Why did he 
do it.^’ CjTus asked softly. 


34 



Adam tried to answer, but his mouth was caked and dry,. He' 
licked his lips and started them bleeding again. ‘I don’t know,’ 
he said. 

Cyrus stumped over to him and grasped him .by the arm so 
fiercely that he winced and tried to pull away. ‘Don’t lie to me! 
Why did he do it? Did you have an argument?’ 

‘No.’ 

Cyrus wrenched at him. ‘Tell me! I want to know. Tell me! 
You’ll have to tell me. I’ll make you tell me ! Goddam it, you’re 
always protecting him ! Don’t you think I know that? Did you 
tliink you were fooling me? Now tell me, or by God I’ll keep 
ybu standing there all night ! ’ 

Adam cast about for an answer. ‘He doesn’t think you love 
him.’ 

Cj-Tus released the arm and hobbled back to his chair and sat 
down. He rattled the pen in the ink bottle and looked blindly at 
his record book. ‘Alice,’ he said, ‘help Adam to bed. You’ll have 
to cut his shirt off, I guess. Give him a hand.’ He got up again, 
went to the comer of the room where the coats hung on nails 
and, reaching behind the garments, brought out his shotgun, 
broke it to verify its load, and clumped out of the door. 

Alice raised her hand as though she would hold him back with 
a rope of air. And her rope broke and her face hid her thoughts. 
'Go in your room,’ she said. ‘I’ll bring some water in a basin.’ 

Adam lay on the bed, a sheer pulled up to his waist, and Alice 
patted the cuts with a linen handkerchief dipped in warm 
water. She was silent for a long time and then she continued 
Adam’s sentence as though there had never been an interval, ‘He 
doesn’t think his father loves him. But you love him -you 
always have.’ 

Adam did not answer her. 

She went on quietly, ‘He’s a strange boy. You have to know 
him -all rough shell, all anger until you Imow.’ She paused to 
cough, leaned down and coughed, and when the spell was over 
her cheeks were flushed and she was exhausted. ‘You have to 
know him,’ she repeated. ‘For a long time he has given me h'ttle 
presents, pretty things jmu wouldn’t think he’d even notice. But 
he doesn’t give them right out. He hides them where he Imows 
I’ll find them. And you can look at him for hours and he won’t 
ever give the slightest sign he did it. You have to know him.’ 

She smiled at Adam and he closed his e3'es. 


35 


CHAPTER 4 

I 

Charles stoob at the bar in the village inn and Charles 
was laughing delightedly at the funny stories the night-stranded 
drummers were telling. He got out his tobacco sack - 

meagre jingle of silver and bought the men a drink to keep them 
talking. He stood and grinned and rubbed his split knuckles. 
And when the drummers, accepting his drink, raised their 
•glasses and said, ‘Here’s to you,’ Charles was delighted. He 
ordered another drink for his new friends, and then he joined 
them for some kind of deviltry in another place. 

When Cyrus stumped out into the night be was filled with a 
, kind of despairing anger at Charles. He looked on the road for 
lus son, and he went to the inn to look for him, but Charles was. 
gone. It is probable that if he had found him that night he 
would have killed him, or tried to. The direction of a big act 
will warp historj', but probably all acts do the same in their 
degree, down to a stone stepped over in the path or a breath 
caught at sight of a pretty girl or a finger-nail nicked in the 
N garden soil. 

Naturally it was 'not long before Charles was told that his 
father was looking for him with a shotgun. He hid out for two 
weeks, and when he finally did return, murder had sunk back to 
simple anger and he paid his penalty in overtvork and a false, 
theatrical humility. 

Adam lay four days in bed, so stiff and aching that he could 
not move without a groan. On the third day his father gave evi- 
dence of his power with tlie military. He did it as a poultice to 
his own pride and also as a kind of prize for Adam. Into the 
house, into Adam’s bedroom, came a captain of cavalry and two 
¦ sergeants in dress uniform of blue. In the door-yard their horses 
were held by two privates. Lying in his bed, Adam was enlisted 
in the army as a private in the cavalry'. He signed the Articles of 
war and took tlie oath while his father and Alice looked on. And 
. his father's eyes glistened with tears. 

After the soldiers had gone his father sat with him a long 
time, ‘I’ve put you in the cavalry' for a reason,’ he said. ‘Barrack 
life is not a good life for long. But the cavalry has work to do. 
I made sure of tlrat. You'll like going for the Indian country. 

36 ¦ , 



There’s action coming. I can’t teU you how I know. Thete’s 
fighting on the way.’ ; 

‘Yes, sir/ Adam said. 

II 

It has always seemed strange to me that it is usually men like 
Adam who have to do the soldiering. He did not like fighting to 
start with, and far from learning to love it, as some men do, he 
felt an increasing revulsion for violence. Several times his offi- . 
cers looked closely at Iiim for malingering, but no charge was 
brought. During these five years of soldiering Adam did more 
detail work than any man in the squadron, but if he killed an 
enemy it was an accident of ricochet. Being a marksman and 
sharpshooter, he was peculiarly fitted to miss. By this time the 
Indian fighting had become like dangerous cattle-drives - the 
tribes were forced into revolt, driven and decimated, and the 
sad, sullen remnants settled on starvation lands. It 'was not nice 
work, but, given the pattern of the country’s development, it had 
to be done. 

To Adam, who was an instrument, who saw not the future 
farms but only the torn bellies of fine humans, it was revolting 
and useless. When he fired his carbine to miss he was commit- 
ting treason against his unit, and he didn’t care. The emotion of 
non-violence was building in him until it became a prejudice 
like any other thought-stultifying prejudice. To inflict any hurt 
on anything for any purpose became inimical to him. He became 
obsessed with tliis emotion, for such it surely was, until it 
blotted out any possible thinking in its area. Indeed he was com- 
, mended three times and then decorated for bravery. 

As he revolted more and more from violence, his impulse took 
the opposite direction. He ventured his life a number of times to 
bring in wounded men. He volunteered for work in field hos- 
pitals even when he was exhausted from his regular duties. He . 
was regarded by his comrades' with contemptuous affection and. 
the unspoken fear men have of impulses they do not tmder- 
standi ¦ ' _ 

Charles wrote to his brother regularly — of the farm and the 
village, of sick cows and a foaling mare, of the added pasture 
and the lightning-struck barn, of Alice’s choking death from her 
consumption and his father’s move to a permanent paid position 
in the GAR in Washington. As with many people, Charles, who 
could not talk, wrote with fullness. He set down his loneliness 

37 ¦ 


anO: nis pt:rpiv:.’iJi.Jta, ii'- y“ 

¦ not taow about himself. ¦ • , . , i_ u * • 

During the time Adam was away he knew his brother better 
than ever before or afterwards. In the exchange of letters there 
grew a closeness neither of them could have imagined.- 

Adam kept one letter from his brother, not because he under- 
. stood it completely but, because it seemed to have a covered 
meaning he could' not get at. ‘Dear Brother Adam/- the letter 
said, ‘I take my pen in hand to hope you are in good health’ - he 
always started this way to ease himself gently into, the task of 
WTiting. ‘I have not had 3 'our answer to my last letter, but I, pre- 
sume -you have other things to do - ha! ha! The rain came wrong • 
and damned the' apple blossoms. There won’t be many to eat next 
¦winter but I will save what I can. Tonight I cleaned the house 
and it is wet and soapy and maybe not any cleaner. How do j;ou 
- suppose Mother kept it the way she did? It does not looks the 
same. Something settles down on it. I don’t know wtot, but if 
will not scrub off. But I have spread the dirt around more 
. evenly anjnvays. Ha ! ha ! 

‘Did Father write you anything about his trip? He’s gone 
clean out to San Francisco in California for an encampment of 
the Grand Army. The Secty. of War is going to be there, and 
<¦: Father is to introduce him. But this is not any great shucks to 

¦¦ 'Father. He has met the President, three, four times and even 
been to supper to the White House. I would like to see the 
White House. Maybe you and me can go together when you 
come home. Father could put us up for a few days. and he 
would be wanting to see you anyways. 

T think I bener look around for a Avife. This is a good farm, 
and et'en if I’m no bargain there’s girls could do worse than 
this farm. What do you think? You did not say if j^ou are going 
to come live home when you get out of the army. I hope soi 1 
miss j-ou.’ 

The writing stopped there. There was a scratch on the page 
and a splash of ink and then it went on in pencil, but the writ- 
ing was different. 

In pencil it said, ‘Later. Well, right there the pen give out. 
One of the points broke off. I’ll have to buy another pen-point 
in the village - rusted right through.’ 

The words began to flow more smoothly. ‘I guess I should 
wait for a new pen-point and not write with a pencil. Only 
I was sitting here in the kitchen with the lamp on and I guess I 
got to tliinking and it come on late -after twelve, I guess, but I 

38 


nev-cr looked. Old Black Joe started crowing out in the- hen- 
house. Then Mother’s rocking-chair cricked for all the -World 
like she was sitting in it. You know I don’t take truck with that; 
but it set me minding backwards, you know' how you do some- 
times. I guess I’ll tear this letter up maybej because what’s the 
good of writing stuff like this.’ 

The w'ords began to race now as though they couldn’t get out 
fast enough. Tf I’m to throw' it away I’d just as well set it down,’ 
tlie letter said. ‘It’s like the w’hole house was alive and had eyes 
everywhere, and like there was people behind the door just ready 
to come in if you looked away. It kind of makes my skin crawl. 
I w’ant to say - 1 want to say - 1 mean, I never understood -W'ell, 
why our father did it. I mean, why didn’t he like that. knife I 
bought for him on his birthday. Why didn’t he? It w'as a good, 
knife and he needed a good knife. If he had used it or even 
honed it, or took it out of his pocket and looked at it -that’s aU 
he had to do. If he’d liked it I w'ouldn’t have took out after you. 
I had to rake out after j'ou. Seems like to me my mother’s chair 
is rocking a little. It’s just the light. I don’t take any truck with 
that. Seems like to me there’s something not finished. Seems like 
when you half finished a job and can’t think what it tvas. Some- 
thing didn’t get done. I shouldn’t be here. I ought to be wan- 
dering around the tvorld instead of sitting here on a good farm 
looking for a wife. There is something wrong, like it didn’t get 
finished, like it happened too soon and left something out. It’s 
me should be where you are and you here. I nc\'er thought like 
this before. Maybe because it’s late -it’s later than that. I just 
looked out and it’s first dawn. I don’t tliink I fell off to sleep. 
How could the night go so fast? I can’t go to bed now. I 
couldn’t sleep anyways.’ 

t. The letter was not signed. Maybe Charles forgot he had in- 
tended to destroy it and sent it along. But Adam saved it for a 
time, and whenever he read it again it gave him a chill and he 
didn’t know why. 


39 



CHAPTERS 

O n T H E ranch the little Hamiltons began to grow up, and every 
, year there was a new one. George was a tall handsome boy, 
gentle and sweet, who had from the first a kind of courtlinKS. 
Even as a little toy he was polite and wliat they used to call ‘no 
trouble’. From his father he inherited the neatness of clothing ¦ 
and body and hair, and he never seemed ill-dressed even when ¦ 

' he was..George was a sinless boy and grew to be a sinless mart. 

• No crime of commission was ever attributed to him, and his 
crimes of omission were only misdemeanours. In his middle life, 
at about the time such things were known about, it was dis- 
¦ covered that he had pernicious anaemia. It is possible that his ' 
virtue lived on a lack of energy. 

Behind George, Will grew along, dumpy and stolid. Will had 
little imagination but he had great energy. From childhood .on 
he was a hard worker, if anyone would tell him what to work 
at, and once told he was indefatigable. He was a consert'ative, 
not only in politics but in everything. Ideas he found revolu- . 
scs. tionary, and he avoided them with suspicion and distaste. Will' ¦ 
lived to live so that no one could find fault with him, and to do 
that he had to Eve as nearly like other people as possible. 

Maybe his father had something to do with Will’s distaste for 
cither change or variation. When Will was a growing boy, his 
father had not been long enough in the Salinas Valley to be 
thought of as. an ‘old-timer’. He was in fact a foreigner and an • 
Irishman. At that time the Irish were much disliked in America. 
They were looked upon with contempt, particularly on the East 
Coast, but a little of it must have seeped out to the West. And 
Samuel had not only variability but was a man of ideas and in- 
novations. In small cut-off communities such a man is always 
regarded with suspicion until he has proved he is no danger to 
the others. A shining man like Samuel could, and can^ cause a 
lot of trouble. He might, for example, prove too attractive to the 
wives of men who knew they were dull. Then there were his 
education and his reading, the books he bought and borrowed, 
his knowledge of things that could not be eaten or worn or co- 
, habited with, his interest in poetry and his respect for good 
writing. If Samuel had been a rich man like the Thornes or the 
-Delmars, with their big houses and wide flat lands, he would 
have had a great library. 


40 



The Delmars had a library- nothing but books’ in it and 
panelled in oak, Samuel, bj' borrowing, had read miiny more of 
the Delmars’ books than the Delmars had. In that day an edu- 
cated rich man was acceptable. He might send his sons to col- 
lege without comment, might wear a vest and white shirt and 
tie in the day-time of a week-day, might wear gloves and keep 
his nails clean. And since the lives and practices of rich men 
were mj^tcrious, who knows what they could use or not use? 
But a poor man - what need had he for poetry or for painting 
or for music not fit for singing or dancing? Such things did not 
help him bring in a crop or keep a scrap of cloth on his child- 
ren’s backs. And if in spite of this he persisted, maybe he had 
reasons which would not stand the light of scrutiny. 

Take Samuel, for instance. He made drawings of work he in- 
tended to do with iron or wood. That was good and understand- 
able, e\'cn enviable. But on the edges of the plans he made other 
drawdngs, sometimes trees, sometimes faces or animals or bugs, 
sometimes just figures that you couldn’t make out at all. And 
these caused men to laugh with embarrassed uneasiness. Then, 
too, you never knew in advance what Samuel would think or say 
or do - it might be anything. 

The first fetv years after Samuel came to Salinas Valley there 
was a vague distrust of him. And perhaps Will as a little boy 
heard talk in tlic San Lucas store. Little boys don’t want their 
fathers to be different from other men. Will might have picked 
up his conservatism right then. Later, as the other children came 
along and grew, Samuel belonged to the valley, and it was proud 
of him in the way a man who owns a peacock is proud. Thejf 
weren’t afraid of him any more, for he did not seduce their 
wives or lure them out of sweet mediocrity. The Salinas Valley 
grew fond of Samuel, but by that time Will was formed. 

Certain individuals, not by any means always deserving, are 
truly beloved of the gods. Things come to them without their 
effort or planning. Will Hamilton was one of these. And the 
gifts he received were the ones he could appreciate. As a grow- 
ing boy Will was lucky. Just as his father could not make money. 
Will could not help making it. When Will Hamilton raised 
chickens and his hens began to lay, the price of eggs rvent up. 
As a young man, when two of his friends who ran a IMe store 
came to the point of despondent bankruptcy. Will was asked to 
lend them a little money to tide them .over the quarter’s bills, and 
they gave him a one-third interest for a pittance. He was not 
niggardly. He gave them what they asked for. The store ws on 

- 41 




her to a secret place far from the house, whetted his pocket-knife 
on a stone, and cut the offending halter of speech. And then he 
ran away and was sick. 

The Hamilton house grew as the family grew. It was designed 
to be unfimshed, so that lean-tos could jut out as thej' were 
needed. The original . room and kitchen soon disappeared in a 
welter of these lean-tos. 

Afeanwhile Samuel got no richer. He developed a very bad 
patent habit, a disease many men suffer from. He invented a 
part of a threshing machine, better, cheaper, and more eflScient 
than any in e.Nistence. The patent attorney- ate up his little profit 
for the year. Samuel sent his models to a manufacturer, who 
promptly rejected the plans and used the method. The next few 
years were kept lean by the suing, and the drain stopped only 
when he lost the suit. It was his first sharp experience with, the 
rule that without money you cannot fight money. But he had 
caught the patent fever, and j-ear after year the money made 
by^ threshing and by smithing was drained off in patents. The 
Hamilton children went barefoot, and their overalls were patched 
and food was sometimes scarce, to pay for the crisp blue-prints 
with cogs and planes and elevations. 

Some men think big and some think h'ttlc. Samuel and his 
sons Tom and Joe thought big and George and Will thought 
little. Joseph was the fourth son -a kind of mooning boj', greatly 
beloved and protected by the whole family. He early discovered 
that a smiling helplessness was his best protection from work. 
His brothers were tough hard workers, all of them. It was easier 
to do Joe’s work than to make him do it. His mother and father 
thought him a poet because he wasn’t any good at anything else. 
And they so impressed him with this that he wrote glib verses 
to prove it. Joe was physically lazy, and probably mentally lazy 
too. He day-dreamed out his life, and his mother loved him 
more than the others because she thought he was helpless. Actu- 
ally he was the least helpless, because he got exactly what he 
wanted with a minimum of effort. Joe was the darling of the 
family. 

In feudal times an inepmess with sw'ord and spear headed a 
young man for the Church: in die Hamilton family Joe’s in- 
ability properly to function at farm and forge headed him for a ' 
higher education. He was not sickly or weak but he did. not lift 
¦ very well; he rode horses badly and d^^ted them. The w'hole 
family laughed with affection , %vhen . they thought of Joe tty^S 
to ieam to plough; his tortuous first furrow .wound about like 

43 




places where it seems to refute itself did not confuse her in the 
least. And finally she came to a point where she knew it so well 
that she went right on reading it without listening. 

Liza enjoyed universal respect because she was a good woman ' 
and raised good children. She could hold up her head anywhere. 
Her husband and her children and her grandchildren respected 
her- There was a nail-hard strengtit in her, a lack of any com- 
promise, a rightness in the face of all opposing wrongness, which 
made you hold her in a kind of awe but not in warmth. 

Liza hated alcoholic liquors with an iron zeal. Drinking alco- 
hol in any form she regarded as a crime against a properly out- 
raged deity. Not only would she not touch it herself, but she 
resisted its enjoyment by anyone else. The result naturally was 
that her husband Samuel and all her children had a good lusty 
love for a drink. 

Once when he was verj’- ill Samuel asked, TLiza, couldn't I 
have a glass of whisky to ease me?’ 

She set her h'ttle hard chin. ‘Would you go to the throne 
of God with liquor on j'our breath? You w'ould not!’ she 
said. 

Samuel rolled over on his side and went about his illness with- 
out ease. 

When Liza was about seventy her elimination slowed up and 
her doctor told her to take a tablespoon of port wine for medi- 
cine. She forced down the first spoonful, making a crooked face, 
but it was not so bad. And from that moment she never drew a 
completely sober breath. She always took the wine in a table- 
spoon, it was always medicine, but after a time she was doing 
over a quart a day and she was a much more relaxed and happy 
woman. 

Samuel and Liza Hamilton got all of their children raised and 
well towards adulthood before the turn of the century. It was a 
whole clot of Hamiltons growing up on the ranch to the east of 
King City. And they were American children and young men 
and women. Samuel never w'cnt back to Ireland and gradually 
he forgot it entirely. He was a busy man. He had no time for 
nostalgia. The Salinas Valley was the world. A trip to Sah'nas 
sixty miles to the north at the head of the valley was event 
enough for a year, and the incessant work on the ranch, the care 
and feeding and clothing of his bountiful family, took most of 
his time - but not all. His energy was large. 

His daughter Una had become a brooding student, tense and 
• dark. He was proud of her wild, exploring mind. Olive was pre- 

45 




a new set of girls took tlieir place. Mr Hallam,.the innkeeper/ 
had no part in the arrangement. He could almost say with truth 
that he didn’t Imow anything about it. He simply collected five -, 
ttacs the normal rent for his three rooms. The girls were as- ¦ 
signed, procured, moved, disciplined, and robbed by a whore- 
master named Edwards, who lived in Boston. His girls.movcd in 
a slow circuit among the small towns, never staying anywhere 
more than two weeks. It was an extremely workable system. A 
girl was not in town long enough to cause remark either by citi- 
zen or town marshal. They stayed pretty much in file rooihs and 
avoided public places. They were forbidden on pain of beating 
to drink or make noise or to fall in love witli anyone. Meals were 
ser\-ed in their rooms, and the clients were carefully screened. 
No drunken man was permitted to go up to them. Every six 
months each girl was given one month of vacation to get drunk 
and raise hell. On the job, let a girl be disobedient to the rules, 
and Mr Edwards personally stripped her, gagged her, and horse- 
whipped her within an inch of her life. If she did it again she 
found herself in jail, charged with vagrancy and public prostitu- 
tion. 

The two-week stands had another advantage. Many of the 
girls were diseased, and a girl had nearly always gone away by 
the time her gift had incubated in a client. There was no one for 
a man to get mad at. Mr Hallam kne\v nothing about it, and Mr 
Edwards never appeared publicly in his business capacity. He 
liad a very good thing in his circuit 

The girls were all pretty much alike -big, healthy, lazy, and 
dull. A man could hardly tell there had been a cliange. Charles 
Trask made it a habit to go to the inn at least once every two 
weeks, to creep up to the top floor, do his quick business, and 
return to the bar to get mildly drunk. 

The Trask house had never been gay, but lived in only by 
Charles it took on a gloomy, rustling decay. The lace curtains 
were grey, the floors, although swept, grew sticky and dank. The , 
kitchen was lacquered - walk, windows, and ceiling - with grease 
from the frying-pans. 

The constant scrubbing by the wives who had lived there and 
the bi-annual deep-seated scouring had kept the, dirt down. 
Charles rarely did more than sweep. He gave up sheets on his 
bed and slept between blankets. What good to clean the house 
when there was no one to see it? Only on the flights he went to 
the inn did he wash himself and put on clean clothes. ¦' 

Charles developed a restlessness that got him out at dawi^ He 

. , , 47 




me. I got plenty other scars. It just seetns like I was inarked; 
And when I go into town, like ,to the inn, why, people are 
always looking at it. I can hear them talking about it when they 
don’t know I can hear. I don’t know why they’re so damn 
curious about it. It gets so I don’t feel like going in town at all.’ 


1 1 

Adam was discharged in 18S5 and started to beat his way home. 
In appearance he had changed little. There was no military car- 
riage about him. The cavalry didn’t act that way. Indeed some 
units took pride in sloppy posture. 

Adam felt that he was sleep-walking. It is a hard thing to- 
leave any deeply routined hfe, even if you hate it. In the mom-.' 
ing he awakened on a split second and lay awaiting reveille. His 
calves missed the hub of leggings and his throat felt naked with- 
out its tight collar. He arrived in Chicago, and there, for no rea- 
son, rented a furnished room for a week, stayed in it for two 
days, went to Buffalo, changed his mind, and moved to Niagara 
Falls. He didn’t want to go home, and he put it off as long as 
possible. Home was not a pleasant place in his mind. The kind 
of feelings he had had tliere were dead in him, and he had a 
reluctance to bring them to life. He watched the falls by the 
hour. Their roar stupefied and hypnotized him. 

One evening he felt a crippling loneliness for the close men in 
barracks, and tent. His impulse was to rush into a crowd for 
warmth, any crowd. The first crowded public place he could 
find was a little bar, thronged and smoky. He sighed with plea- 
sure, almost nestled in the human clot the way a cat nestles into 
a woodpile. He ordered whisky and drank it and felt warm and 
good. He did not see or hear. He simply absorbed the contact. 

As it grew late and the men began to drift away, he became 
fearful of the time when he would have to go home. Soon he 
was alone with the bar-tender, who was rubbing and rubbing- 
the mahogany of the bar and trying with his' eyes and his man- 
ner to get Adam to go. 

T’ll have one more,’ Adam said. 

The bar-tender set the bottle out. Adam noticed him for the 
first time. He had a strawberry mark on his forehead. 

T’m a stranger in these parts,’ said Adam. 

‘That’s what we mostly get at the falls,’ the bar-tepder said. 

‘I’ve been in the army. Cavalry.’ 

‘Yeah ! ’ the bar-tender said. 


49 




At the top of the first flight he looked back. Her head was 
raised, and now her chin made a shadow on her throat and her 
eyes had no pupils. 

His room smelled of dust dampened and dried many times. 
He picked a match from his block and scratched it on the side of 
the block. He lighted the shank of candle in the japanned 
candlestick and regarded the bed -as spineless as a hammock 
and covered with a dirty patchwork quilt, the cotton batting 
spilling from the edges. 

The porch steps complained again, and Adam knew the 
woman would be standing in her doorway ready to spray in- 
hospitality on the new arrival. 

Adam sat down in a straight chair and put his elbows on his 
knees and supported his chin in his hands. A lodger down the 
hall began a patient, continuing cough against the quiet night. 

And Adam knew he could not go home. He had heard old 
soldiers teU of doing what he was going to do. 

T just couldn’t stand it. Didn’t have no place to go. Didn’t 
know nobody. Wandered around and pretty soon I got in a 
panic like a kid, and first thing I knowed I’m begging the ser- 
' geant to let me back in - like he was doing me a favour.’ 

Back in Chicago, Adam re-enlisted and asked to be assigned 
¦ to his old regiment. On the train going west the men of his 
squadron seemed very dear and desirable. 

While he waited to change trains in ICansas City, he heard his 
name called and a message was shoved into his liand - orders to 
report to Washington to the office of tlie Secretary of War. 
Adam in his five years had absorbed rather than learned never 
to wonder about an order. To an enlisted man the high far gods 
in Washington were crazy, and if a soldier wanted to keep his 
sanity he thought about generals as little as possible. 

In due course Adam gave his name to a clerk and went to sit 
in an ante-room. His fatlier found him there. It took Adam a 
moment to recognize Cyrus, and much longer to get used to 
him. Cyrus had become a great man. He dressed like a great 
man — black broadcloth coat and trousers, wide black hat, over- 
coat with a velvet collar, ebony cane which he made to seem a 
sword. And Cyrus conducted himself like a great man. His 
speech was slow and mellow, measured and unexcited, his ges- 
tures were wide, and new teeth gave him a vulpine smile out of 
all proportion to his emotion. 

After Adam had realized that this was his father he was still 
puzzled. Suddenly he looked down -no wooden leg. The leg 

51 - 




only a bedroom but a sitting-room beside it, and the toilet was in 
a closet right in the bedroom. 

Cyrus sat down in a deep chair and sighed. He pulled up his 
trouser leg and Adam saw the contraption of iron and leather 
and hardwood. Cyrus unlaced the leather sheath that held it on 
his stump and stood the travesty-on-flesh beside his chair. ‘It 
gets to pinching pretty bad,’ he said. 

With the leg off. Iris father became himself again, the self 
Adam remembered. He had experienced the beginning of con- 
tempt, but now the childhood fear and respect and animosity 
came back to him, so that he seemed a little boy testing his 
father’s immediate mood to escape trouble. 

Cyrus made his preparations, drank his whisky, and loosened 
his collar. He faced Adam. ‘Well?’ 

‘Sir?’ 

‘Why did you re-enlist?’ 

‘I - 1 don’t know, sir. I Just wanted to.’ 

*You don’t like the army, Adam.’ 

‘No, sir.’ 

‘Why did you go back?’ 

'I didn’t want to go home.’ 

C3TUS sighed and rubbed the tips of his fingers on the arms of 
his chair. ‘Are you going to stay in the army?’ he asked. 

'I don’t know, sir.’ 

‘I can get you into West Point. I liave influence. I can get you 
discharged so you can enter West Point.’ 

‘I don’t want to go there.’ 

‘Are you defying me?’ Cyrus asked quietly. 

Adam took a long time to answer, and his mind sought escape 
before he said, ‘Yes, sir.’ 

Cyrus said, ‘Pour me some whisky, son,’ and when he had it 
he continued, ‘I wonder if you .know how much influence I 
really have. I can throw the Grand Army at any candidate like 
a sock. Even the President likes to know what I think about pub- 
lic matters. I can get senators defeated and I can pick appoint- 
ments like apples. I can make men and I can destroy men. Do 
you know that?’ 

Adam knew more than that. He knew that Cyrus was defend- 
ing himself with threats. *¥65, sir. I’ve h^rd.’ 

‘I could get you assigned to Washington — assigned to me even 

teach you your way about.’ ¦ 

‘I’d rather go back to my regiment, sir.’ He saw the shadow of 
loss darken his father’s face. . ' — 


53 



an angry letter about Adam’s re-enlistment against his wishes. 
And Cyrus indicated that, in some future, Charles could visit 
him in Washington, but he never asked him again. 

Charles moved back to the house and lived in a kind of sav- 
age filth, taking a satisfaction in overcoming the work of the 
grumbling woman. 

It was a year before Adam wrote to Charles - a letter of em- 
barrassed newsiness building his courage to say, ‘I don’t know 
why I signed again. It was like somebody else doing it. Write 
soon and tell me how you are.’ 

Charles did not reply until he had received four anxious let- 
ters, and tlien he replied coolly, ‘I didn’t hardly expect j'ou’ any- 
way,’ and he went on with a detailed account of farm and 
animals. 

Time had got in its work. After that Charles wrote right after 
New Year’s Day and received a letter from Adam written right 
after New Year’s Day. They had grown so apart that there was 
little mutual reference and no questions. 

Cliarles began to keep one slovenly woman after another. 
When they got on his ner\’es he threw them out the way he 
would sell a pig. He didn’t like them and had no interest in 
whether or not they liked him. He grew away from the village. 
His contacts were only with the inn and the postmaster. The vil- 
lage people might denounce his manner of life, but one thing he 
had which balanced his ugly life e\'en in their eyes. The farm 
had never been so well run. Charles cleared land, built up his 
walls, improved his drainage, and added a hundred acres to the 
farm. More than that, he was planting tobacco, and a long new 
tobacco bam stood impressively behind the house. For these 
things he kept the respect of his neighbours. A farmer cannot 
think too much evil of a good farmer. Charles was spending 
most of his money and all of his energy on the farm. 




merits from a wash-line. They were all kinds of men -literate 
men and ignorant men, clean men and dirty men -but all of 
tliem had restlessness in common. They followed warmth and 
avoided great heat and great cold. As the spring advanced they 
tracked it eastward, and the first frost drove them west and 
south. They were brothers to the coyote which, being rvild, lives 
close to man and his chicken-yards : they were near towns but 
not in them. Associations with other men were for a week or for 
a day and then they drifted apart. 

Around the little fires where communal stew bubbled there 
was all manner of talk and only the personal was unmentionable, 
Adam heard of the development of the IWW with its angry 
angels. He listened to philosophic discussions, to metaphysics, 
to aesthetics, to impersonal experience. His companions for the 
night might be a murderer, an unfrocked priest or one who had 
unfrocked himself, a professor forced from his warm berth by a 
dull facultj^ a lone driven man running from memory, a fallen 
arcliangel and a dev'il in training, and each contributed bits of 
thought to the fire as each contributed carrots and potatoes and 
onions and meat to the stew’. He learned' the technique, of shav- 
ing with broken glass, of judging a house before knocking to ask 
for a hand-out. He learned to avoid or get along with hostile 
police and to evaluate a woman for her warmth of heart 

Adam took pleasure in the new life. When autumn touched 
the trees he had got as far as Omaha, and without question or 
reason or thought he hurried west and south, fled through the 
, mountains and arrived with relief in Southern California. He 
wandered by the sea from the border north as far as San Luis 
Obispo, and he learned to pilfer the tide pools for abalones and 
eels and mussels and perch, to dig the sandbars for clams, and to 
trap a rabbit in the dunes with a noose of fish-line. And he lay 
in the sun-warmed sand, counting the waves. 

Spring urged him east again, but more slowly than before. 
Summer was cool in the mountains, and the moxmtain people 
• were kind as lonesome people arc kind. Adam took a j'ob on a 
widow’s outfit near Denver and shared her table and her bed 
humbly vmtil the frost drove him south again. He followed the 
Rio Grande past Albuquerque and El Paso through the Big 
Bend, through ]l.aredo , to Brownsville. He learned Spanish 
words for food and pleasme, and he learned that when people 
are very poor they still have something to give and the impulse 
to give it. He developed a love for poor people he could not have 
conceived if he had not been praor himself. And by no’r*he was 

57 



minimum of pain. It was much more horrible afterwards than 
when it was happening. It is a triumph of self-control to see a 
man whipped until the muscles of his back show ivhite and 
glistening through the cuts and to give no sign of pity or anger 
or interest. And Adam learned this. 

People are felt rather than seen after the -first few moments. 
During his second sentence on the roads of Florida, Adam re- 
duced his personality to a minus. He caused no stir, put out no 
vibration, became as nearly invisible as it is possible to be. And 
when the guards could not feel him, they were not afraid of 
him. They gave him the jobs of cleaning the camps, of handing 
out the slops to the prisoners, of filling the water buckets. 

Adam waited until three days before his second release. Right 
after noon tliat day he filled the water buckets and went back to 
the little river for more. He filled his buckets with stones and 
sank them, and then he eased himself into the water and swam 
a long way dowTi-stream, rested and swam farther down. He 
kept moving in the water until at dusk he found a place under a 
bank with bushes for cover. He did not get out of the water. 

Late in the night he heard the hounds go by, covering both 
sides of the river. He had rubbed his hair liard with green leaves 
to cover human odour. He sat in the water with his nose and 
eyes clear. In the morning the hounds came back, disinterested, 
and the men were too tired to beat the banks properly. When 
thej' were gone, Adam dug a piece of water-logged fried saw- 
belly out of his pocket and ate it. 

He had schooled himself against hurry. Most men were caught 
bolting. It took Adam five days to cross the short distance into 
Georgia. He took no chances, held back his impatience with an 


iron control. He was astonished at his abilit}^ 

On the edge of Valdosta, Georgia, he lay hidden until long 
.after midnight, and he entered the town like a shadow, crept to 
the rear of a cheap store, forced a window slovvdy so that the 
screw's of the lock were pulled from the sun-rotted wood. Then 
he replaced the lock but left the window open. He had to vv'ork 
by moonlight drifting through dirty window's. He stole a pair of 
cheap trousers, a white shirt, black shoes, black hat, and an oil- 
skin raincoat, and he tried on each article for fit. He forced him- 
self to rhake sure nothing looked disturbed before he climbed out 
of the w'indow. He had taken nothing which was not heavily 
stocked. He had not even looked for the cash drawer. Fle lowered 
the window carefully and slipped frorh shadow to shadow m the 
_ moonlight. 


59 




have a few hundred dollars to leave his- sons. That is what he 
looked to be worth. When they inspected his bank-books they" 
found that he had over ninety-three thousand dollars in the 
bank and ten thousand dollars in good securities. They felt very 
different about Mr Trask then. People with that much money 
were rich. They would never have to worry. It was enough to 
start a dynasty. The lawyers congratulated Charles and his 
brother Adam. Under the will, they said, it was to be shared 
equally. After the money they listed the personal effects left by 
the deceased: five ceremonial swords presented to Cyrus at 
various GAR conventions, an olivewood gavel with a gold plate 
on it, a Aiasonic watch charm with a diamond set in the 
dividers, the gold caps from the teeth he had out when he got 
his plates, watch (silver), gold-headed stick, and so forth. 

Charles read the letter twice more and cupped his forehead in 
his hands. He wondered about Adam. He wanted Adam home. 

Charles felt puzzled and dull. He built up the fire and put the 
frying-pan to heat and sliced thick slices of salt pork into it. 
Then he went back to stare at the letter. Suddenly he picked it 
up and put it in tlie drawer of the kitchen table. He decided not 
to think of tlie matter at all for a while. 

Of course he thought of little else, but it was a dull circular 
thinking that came back to the starting point again and again: 
Where had he got it? 

When two events have something in common, in their natures 
or in time or place, we leap happily to the conclusion that they 
are sirhilar, and from this tendency we create magics and store 
them for re-teUing. Charles had never before had a letter de- 
livered at the farm in his life. Some weeks later a boy ran out 
to the farm with a telegram. Charles always connected the letter 
and tlie telegram the way we group two deaths and anticipate a 
third. He hurried to the village railroad station, carrying the 
telegram in his hand. 

‘Listen to this,’ he said to the operator, 
already read it.’- 

‘You did?’ 

‘It comes over the wire,’ said the operator. ‘I WTOte it down. 

‘Oh ! Yes, sure. “Urgent need you telegraph me one hundred 
dollars. Coming home. Adam.’’ ’ ^ 

‘Came collect,’ the operator said, ‘You owe me sixty cents. 

‘Valdosta, Georgia - 1 never heard of it.’ 

‘Neither’d 1^ but it’s there.’ 

‘Say, Carlton, how do you go about telegraphing mone 

61 




Charles inspected him from head to foot. Ton don’t look’ 
prosperous.’ 

‘I’m not.’ 

‘Where’s your valise?’ 

‘I haven’t got one.’ 

‘Jesus Christ! Where’ve 3 '’Ou been?’ 

‘Mostly wandering about all over.’ 

‘Like a hobo?’ 

‘Like a hobo.’- 

After all the years and the life that had made creased leather 
out of Charles’s skin and redness in his dark eyeSj Adam knew 
from remembering tliat Charles was thinking of two things - 
the questions and something else. 

‘Why didn’t you come home?’ 

‘I just got to wandering. Couldn’t stop. It gets into you. 
That’s a real bad scar you’ve got there.’ 

‘That’s the one I wote you about. Gets worse all the time. 
Why didn’t you write? Are j’ou hungry?’ Charles’s hands itched 
into his pockets and out and touched his chin and scratched his 
head. 

‘It maj' go away. I saw a man once -bar-tender- he had one 
that looked like a cat. It was a birthmark. His m'ckname was 
Cat’ . 

'Are you hungr 3 '?’ 

¦ ‘Sure. I guess I am.' 

‘Plan to stay home now?’ 

‘I - 1 guess so. Do you want to get to it now?’ 

‘I - 1 guess so,’ Charles echoed him. ‘Our father is dead.’ 

‘I know,’ 

‘How the hell do you know?’ 

‘Station agent told me. How long ago did he die?’ 

‘ ’Bout a month.’ 

‘What of?’ 

‘Pneumonia,’ 

‘Buried here?' 

‘No. In Washington. I got a letter and nevyspapers. Carried 
him on a caisson with a flag over it. The Vice-President was 
there and the President sent a wreath. All in the papers. Pictures 
too - I’ll show you. I’ve got it all.’ 

Adam studied his brother’s face until Charles looked away. 
‘Are you mad at something?’ Adam asked. 

‘What should I be mad at?’ 

‘It just sounded — ’ 


63 




he said. ‘I just can’t get it through ray head. He loved you more, 
than anything in the world.’ 

‘I don’t believe that.’ 

“You don’t have to. He liked everything }'ou brought him. He 
didn’t like me. He didn’t like anything I gave him. Remember 
the present I gave him, the pocket-knife? I cut and sold a load 
of wood to get that knife. Well, he didn’t even take it to Wash- 
ington with him. It’s right in his bureau right now. And you 
gave him that pup. It didn’t cost you a thing. Well, I’ll show you 
a pictine of that pup. It was at his funeral. A colonel was holding 
it - it tTOS blind, couldn’t walk. They shot it after the funeral.’ 

Adam was puzzled by the fierceness of his brother’s tone. ‘I 
don’t see,’ he said. ‘I don’t see what you’re getting at.’ 

‘I loved him,* said Charles. And, for the first time that Adam 
could remember, Charles began to cry. He put his head down in 
his arms and cried. 

Adam was about to go to him when a h'ttle of the old fear 
came back. No, he thought, if I touched him he would try to 
kill me. He went to the open doonvay and stood looking out, 
and he could hear his brother’s sniffling behind him. 

It was not a prett}' farm near the house -never had been. 
There was litter about it, an unkemptness, a run-downness, a 
lack of plan; no flowers, and bits of paper and scraps of wood 
scattered about on the ground. The house was not prettj’ either. 
It was a well-built shant}' for shelter and cooking. It was a grim 
farm and a grim house, unloved and tmloving. It was no home, 
no place to long for or to come back to. Suddenly Adam thought 
of his step-mother - as unloved as the farm, inadequate, clean in 
her way, but no more wife than the farm was a home. 

His brother’s sobbing had stopped. Adam turned. Charles was 
looking blankly straight ahead. Adam said, ‘Tell me about 
Mother.’ 

‘She died. I wrote you.’ 

‘Tell me about her.’ 

‘I told you. She died. It’s so long ago. She wasn’t your 
Mother.’ 

The smile Adam had once caught on her face flashed up in 
his mind. 'Her face was projected in front of him. 

Charles’s voice came through the image and exploded it. ‘'VPill 
you tell me one thing— not quick — think before you teU me, and 
maybe don’t answer unless it’s true, your answer.’ Charles moved 
his hps to form the question in advance. ‘Do you think it would 
be possible for our father to be — dishonest?’ 

65 




Charles said, ‘How did he get away with it? How in hell did 
he get away with it? Nobody ever questioned it. Did you? Did 
I? Did my mother? Nobody did. Not even in Washington.’ ' 

Adam stood up. ‘What’s in the house to eat? I’m going to 
warm up something.’ 

‘I killed a chicken last night. I’ll fry it if you can wait.’ 

‘Anjthing quick?’ 

‘Some salt pork and plentj’ of eggs.’ 

‘I’ll have that,’ said Adam. 

They left the question lying there, walked mentally around it, 
stepped over it. Their words ignored it, but their minds never 
left it. They wanted to talk about it and could not. Charles fried 
salt pork, warmed up a skillet of beans, fried eggs. 

‘I ploughed tlie pasture,’ he said. ‘Put in rj’e.’ 

‘How did it do?’ 

‘Just fine, once I got the rocks out.’ He touched his forehead. 
‘I got this damn thing trying to pry out a stone.’ 

‘You wrote about tltat,’ Adam said. ‘Don’t know whether I 
told you your letters meant a lot to me.’ 

'You never WTOte much wliat j'ou were doing,’ said Charles. . 

‘I guess I didn’t want to think about it. -It was pretty bad, 
most of it.’ 

‘I read about the campaigns in the papers. Did you go on 
those?’ 

‘Yes. I didn’t want to think about them. Still don’t.’ 


‘Did you kill Injuns?’ 

‘Yes, we killed Injuns.’ 

‘I guess tlte/re real ornery.’ 

‘I guess so.’ 

‘You don’t have to talk about it if you don’t want to.’ 

, ‘I don’t want to.’ 

They are their dinner under the paraflin lamp. ‘We’d get more . 
light if I would only get around to washing that lampshade.’ 

‘I’ll do it,’ said Adam. ‘It’s hard to think of everything.’ 

‘It’s going, to be fine having you back. How would you like to 
go to the iim after supper?’ 

‘VX'^ell, we’ll see. Maybe I’d like just to sit awhile.’ 

•I didn’t write about it in a letter, but tliey’ve got girls at the 
inn. I didn’t know but you’d like to go in with me. They change 
e\'ery two weeks. I didn’t know but you’d like to look them over. 


‘Girls?’ 

‘Yes, they’re upstairs. Makes it pretty handy. And I 
you just coming home — ’ 


'’-'¦'nght 


67 



first? I guess we' might as well get into it. We’re not thinking 
about anything else.’ 

‘There’s the money,’ said Charles. ‘Over a hundred thousand 
dollars - a fortune.’ 

‘What about the money?’ 

‘Well, where did it come from?’ 

‘How do I know? I told you he might have speculated. Some- 
body might have put him on to a good thing there in Washing- 
ton.’ 

‘Do you believe that?’ 

‘I don't believe anj^ing,’ Adam said. ‘I don’t Imow, so what 
can I believe?’ 

‘It’s a lot of money,’ said Charles. ‘It’s a fortune left to us. We 
^ can live the rest of our lives on it, or we can buy a hell of a lot 
of land and make it paj'. Maybe you didn’t think about it, but 
we’re rich. We’re richer than anybody hereabouts.’ 

Adam laughed. ‘You say it like it was" a jail sentence.’ 

‘Where did it come from?’ 

‘What do you care?’ Adam asked. ‘Maybe we should just 
settle back and enjoy it.’ 

'He wasn’t at Gettysburg. He wasn’t at any goddam battle in 
the whole war. He was hit in a skirmish. Everything he told was 
lies.’ 

‘What are you getting at?’ said Adam. 

‘I think he stole the money,’ Charles said miserably. ‘You 
asked me and that’s what I think.’ 

‘Do you know where he stole it?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Then why do you think he stole it?’ 

‘He told lies about the war.’ 

\ ‘What?’ 

‘I mean, if he lied about the war— why, he could steal.’ 

‘How?’ 

‘He held jobs in the GAR -big jobs. He maybe could have 
got into the treasury,- rigged the books.’ 

Adam sighed. ‘Well, if that’s what you think, why don’t you 
write to them and tell them? Have them go over the books. If 
it’s true we could give back the money.’ 

Charles’s face was twisted and the scar on his forehead showed 
dark. ‘The Vice-President came to his funeral. The President 
sent a wreath. There was a line of carriages half a mils long and 
hundreds of people on foot. And do you know who the pa 
bearers were?’ 


69 




‘But you said you did not love our father. How can you have 
faith in him if you didn’t love him?’ 

‘Maybe that’s the reason,’ Adam said slowly, feeling his way. 
‘Maybe if I Itad loved him I would have been jealous of him. 
You were. Maybe -maybe love makes you suspicious and doubt- 
ing. Is it true tliat when you love a woman you are never sure - 
never sure of her because you aren’t sure of yourself? I can see it 
pretty clearly. I can see how you loved liim and what it did to 
you. I did not love him. Maj’bc he loved me. He tested me and 
hurt me and punished me and finally he sent me out like a 
sacrifice, maybe to make up for somet^g. But he did not love 
you, and so he had faith in you. Maybe -whj*, maybe it’s a kind 
of reverse.’ 

Charles stared at him. ‘I don’t understand,’ he said. 

‘I’m UT’ing to,’ said Adam. ‘It’s a new thought to me. I feel 
good. I feel better maybe than I have e^^er felt in my whole life. 
I’ve got rid of something. Maybe sometimes I’ll get what you 
have, but I haven’t got it now.’ 

‘I don’t understand,’ Charles said again. 

‘Can you see that I don’t think our father was a thief? I don’t 
beb'ev'e he was a liar.’ 

‘But the papers — ' 

‘‘I won’t look at the papers. Papers are no match at all for my 
faith in my father.’ 

Charles was breathing heavily. ‘Then you would take the 
money?’ 

‘Of course.’ 

‘Even if he stole it?’ 

‘He did not steal it He couldn’t have stolen it.’ 

‘I don’t understand,’ said Charles. 

‘You don’t? Well, it does seem that maybe this might be the 
secret of the whole thing. Look, I’ve never mentioned this - 
do you remember when you beat me up just before I went 
away?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Do you remember later? You came back with a hatchet to 
kill me.’ " 

‘I don’t remember very well. I must have been crazy.’ 

‘I didn’t know then, but I know now — you were fighting for 
your love.’ 

‘Love?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Adam. ‘We’ll use the money well. Maybe we’ll stay 
here. Maybe we’ll go away — maybe to Cahfomia. We 11 have to 

71 




a limited field than the uncrippled, so did Cathy, using her 
difference, make a painful and bewildering stir in her world. 

There was a time when a girl like Cathy would have been 
called possessed by tlie devil. She would have been exorcised to 
cast out the evil spirit, and if after many trials that did not 
work, she would have been burned as a witch for the good of 
the community. The one thing that may not be forgiven a witch 
is her ability to distress people, to make them restless and un- 
easy and even envious. 

As though natture concealed a trap, Cathy had from the first 
a face of innocence. Her hair was gold and lovely; wide-set hazel 
eyes with upper lids that drooped made her look mysteriously 
sleepy. Her nose was delicate and thin, and her cheekbones high 
and wide, sweeping down to a small chin so that her face was 
heart-shaped. Her mouth was well shaped and well lipjjed but 
abnormally small -what used to be called a rosebud. Her ears 
were vety little, without lobes, and they pressed so close to her 
head that even with her hair combed up they made no silhouette. 
They were thin flaps sealed against her head. 

Cathy always had a child’s figure even after she was grown, 
slender, delicate arms and hands - tiny hands. Her breasts never 
developed very much. Before her puberty the nipples turned in- 
ward. Her mother had to manipulate them out when they be- 
came painful in Cathie’s tenth year. Her body was a boy’s body, 
narrow-hipped, straight-legged, but her ankles were thin and;, 
straight without being slender. Her feet were small and round 
and stubby, with fat insteps almost like little hoofs. She was a 
pretty child and she became a pretty vvoman. Her voice was 
huskily soft, and it could be so sweet as to be irresistible. But 
there must have been some steel cord in her throat, for Cathy’s 
voice could cut like a file when she wished. 

Even as a child she had some quality that made people look at 
her, then look away, then look back at her, troubled at some- 
thing foreign. Something looked out of her eyes, and was never 
there when one looked again. She moved quietly and talked little, 
but she could enter no room without causing everyone to turn 
towards her. 

She made people uneasy but not so that they wanted to go 
away from her. Men and women wanted to inspect her, to be 
close to her, to try to find what caused the disturbance she dis- 
tributed so subtly. And since this had always been so, Cathy did 
not find it strange; t, <- 

Cathy was different from other children in many ways, but 

73 




living if he worked very hard. Mr Ames came in contact with 
other children away from Itis home and he felt that Cathy was 
not like other children. It was a matter more felt than known. 
He was uneasy about his daughter but he could not have said 
why. 

Nearly everyone in the world has appetites and impulses, trig- 
ger emotions, islands of selfishness, lusts just beneath the sur- 
face. And most people either hold such things in check or 
indulge tltem secretly. Cathy knew not only these impulses in 
others but how to use them for her own gain. It is quite possible 
that she did not believe in any other tendencies in humans, for 
while she was preternaturally alert in some directions she was 
completely blind in others. 

Cathy learned when she was very young that sexuality with all 
its attendant yearnings and pains, jealousies and taboos, is the. 
most disturbing impulse humans have. And in that day it was 
even more disturbing than it is now, because the subject was un- 
mentionable and unmentioned. Everyone concealed that little 
heU in himself, while pubhely pretending it did not exist -and 
when he was caught up in it he was completely helpless. Cathy 
learned tltat by the manipulation and use of this one part of 
people she could gain and keep power over nearly anyone. It was 
at once a weapon and a threat. It was irresistible. And since the 
blind helplessness seems never to have fallen on Cathy, it is 
probable that she had very little of the impulse herself ^d 
deed felt a contempt for those who did. And when you think of 
it in one way, she was right. 

What freedom men and w’omen could have, were they not 
constantly tricked and trapped and enslaved and tortured by 
their sexuality! The only drawback in that freedom is that with- 
out it one would not be a human. One woidd be a monster. 

At ten Cathy knew something of the power of the sex impulse 
and began coldly to experiment with it. She planned everything 
coldly, foreseeing difficulties and preparing for them. 

The sex play of children has always gone on. Everyone, I 
guess, who is not abnormal has foregathered with little girls in 
some dim leafy place, in the bottom of a manger, under a wil- 
low/ in a culvert under a road — or at least has dreamed of doing 
so. Nearly all parents are faced with the problem sooner or later, 
and then the child is luclry if the parent remembers his own 
childhood. In the time of Cath^s childhood, however, it was 
harder.- The parents, denying it in themselves, were hor-’^ed to 
find it in their children. 


75 






the little mouth full of sweetness, caught attention and held it. 
She finished the eight grades of grammar school with such a 
good record that her parents entered her in the small high 
school, although in that time it was not usual for a girl to go 
on with her studies. But Cathy said she «-anted to be a teacher, 
which delighted her mother and father, for this was the one 
profession of digniu* open to a girl of a good but nor well-to-do 
family. Parents took honour from a daughter who was a teacher. 

Cathy was fourteen when she entered high school. She had 
always been precious to her parents, but with her entrance into 
the rarities of algebra and Latin she climbed into clouds where 
her parents could not follow. The%- had lost her. The\’ felt that 
she was transported to a higher order. 

The teacher of Latin was a pale intense TOung man who had 
failed in divinity school and yet had enough education to teach 
the inevitable grammar, Caesar, Cicero. He was a quiet young 
man who warmed his sense of failure to his bosom. Deep in 
himself he felt that he had been rejected b\' God, and for cause. 

For a time it was noticed that a flame leaped in James Grew 
and some force glowed in his eyes. He was nes-er seen with 
Cathy and no relationship was even suspected. 

James Grew became a man. He walked on his toes and sang to 
himself. He wrote letters so persuasive that the directors of his 
divinity school looked favourably on rc-admitting him. 

And then the flame went out. His shoulders, held so high and 
square, folded dejectedly. His eyes grew feverish and his hands 
twitched. He was seen in church at night, on his knees, moving 
his lips ov'er prayers. He missed school and sent word that he 
svas ill when it was known that he was walking all alone in the 
hills beyond the town. 

One night, late, he tapped on the door of the Ames house. .Mr 
Ames complained his way out of bed, lighted a candle, flung an 
overcoat over his night-gown, and went to the door. It was a 
'vild and crazy-looking James Grew who stood before him, his 
eyes shining and his body one big shuddcT. 

Tve got to see you,’ he said hoarsely to Mr Ames. 

T^s after midnight,’ Mr Ames said sternly. 

T’ve got to sec you alone. Put on some clothes and come out- 
tide. I’ve got to tall; to you/ 

Young man, I thin): you’re drunk or sick. Go home and get 
tome sleep. It’s after midnight.’ 

I can’t wait, I’ve got to tall; to you.’ 

Come down to the tannery in the morning,’ said Mr Ames, 

79 




Mrs Ames went over the matter of the body and the gun in 
detail. ‘There’s one thing I meant to speak of,’ she said. ‘That 
drunken man who came to the door last night -could that have 
been young Grew?’ 

‘No,’ he said quickly. 

‘Are 5'ou sure? Could you see him in the dark?’ 

‘I had a candle,’ he said sharph’. ‘Didn’t look anj'thing like, 
had a big beard.’ 

‘No need to snap at me,’ she said. ‘I just wondered.’ 

Cathy wiped her mouth, and when she laid her napkin on her 
lap she was smiling. 

Mrs Ames turned to her daughter. ‘You saw him e%'crj' day in 
school, Cathy. Has he seemed sad lately? Did you notice any- 
thing that might mean — 

Cathy looked down at her plate and then up. ‘I thouglit he 
was sick,’ she said. ‘Yes, he has looked bad. Everj-body was talk- 
ing in school today. And somebody -I don’t remember who- 
said that Mr Grew was in some kind of trouble in Boston. I 
didn’t hear what kind of trouble. We all liked Mr Grew.’ She 
wiped her lips delicatel}*. 

That was Cathy’s method. Before the next day was out e\-ery- 
body in town Imew that James Grew had been in trouble in 
Boston, and no one could possibly imagine that Cathy had 
planted the storj'. Even Mrs Ames h,ad forgotten w'hcre she 
heard it. 


IV 

Soon after her sixteenth birthday a change came over Cathy. 
One morning she did not get up for school. Her mother went 
into her room and found her in bed, staring at the ceiling. 
‘Hurry, you’ll be late. It’s nearly m'nc.’ 

Tm- not going.’ There was no emphasis in her voice. 

‘Are yod sick?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Then hurr\', get up.’ 

‘I’m not going.’ 

‘You must be sick. You’ve never missed a day.’ 

Tm not going to school,’ Cathy said calmly. ‘I’m nev’cr going 
to school again.’ 

Her mother’s mouth fell open. ‘What do you mean?’ 

Not ever,’ ^id Cathj' and continued to stare at the ceiling. 
‘Well, we’ll just see what your father has to say about that! 

81 



Pith all our work and expense, and nvo years before you get 
our certificate!’ Then she came close and said softly, You 
ren’t thinking of getting married?’ 


•No.’ . , 

‘Wltat’s that book you’re hiding 

‘Here! I’m not hiding it.* ^ v, . 

'Oh! Alice in Wondcrla?id. You’re too big for that. 

Cathy said, T can get to be \-(> httlc vou can’t even see, 

me.’ 

‘What in the world are you talking about r' 

‘Nobody can find me.’ 

Her mother said angriiv, ‘.Stop making jokes. I don’t know 
%vhat you’re thinking of. \\ hat does .Miss Fancy think she is 
going to do?’ 

‘I don’t know yet,’ said Cathv. ‘I think I’ll go away.' 

‘Well, you lust he there. .Mis^ }*anc\‘, and when your father 
comes home he’ll hate a thing or two to say to you.’ 

Cathy turned her head nrv slowly and looked at her mother. 
Her eves were o.xpressionle^s and cold, .^nd suddenly Mrs Ames 
was afraid id her Jaayhtci. .She went out i^uietly and closed the 
dour In ikr kitchen \he cat down and cupped her hands in her 
lap .md -tar^d out of the window at the weathering carriage 
hmiM 

He; daughter had become a stranger to her. She felt, as most 
p.iuno do at one time or another, that she was losing control, 
th.it the bndle put in her l.anj'- for the governing of Cathy was 
slipping thr.iugh her iingere. She did not know that she had 
never liad am power o' cr (..‘aih.v. She had been used for Cathy’s 
purpose-s aU'.a\s .\fter a while .Mrs .Antes put on a bonnet and 
went to the tannsrv She wanted to talk to her husband away 
fryni the hoioe. 

In the afteinoon t .ithv r.isc listlessh from her bed and spent' 
a long time m Iront ol the mirror. 

That evening .Mr .\mcs, hating what he had to do, delivered 
a lecture to ho daughter. He spoke of her duty, her obligation, 
her natural K've for her parents. Towards the end of his speech 
he was aware that she was not listening to him. This made him 
'¦ngrj' and he fell into threats He spoke of the authority God 
had given him over his child and of how this natural authority 
had been armed hv the state. He had her attention now. She 
looked him right in ihc eyes. Her mouth smiled a little, and her 
eyes did not seem to blink. Finally he had to look away, and 
this enraged him further. He ordered her to stop her nonsense. 


82 



Vaguely he threatened her with whipping if she did not obey 
him. 

He ended on a note of weakness. ‘I want you to promise me 
that you will go to school in the morning and stop your foolish- 
ness.’ 

Her face was expressionless. The little mouth was straight. 
‘All right,’ she said. 

Later that m'ght Mr Ames said to his wife with an assurance 
he did not feel, ‘You sec, it just needs a little authority. Maybe 
we’ve been too lax. But she has been a good child. I guess she 
forgot who’s boss. A little sternness never hurt anybody.’ He 
wished he were as confident as his words. 

In the morning she was gone. Her straw travelling basket was 
gone and the best of her clotliing. Her bed was neatly made. The 
room was impersonal - nothing to indicate tliat a girl liad grown 
up in it. There were no pictures, no mementos, none of the 
normal clutter of growing. Cathy had never played witli dolls. 
The room had no Cathy imprint. 

In his way Mr Ames was an intelligent man. He clapped on 
his derby hat and walked quickly to the railroad station. The 
station agent was certain. Cathy had taken the early morning 
train. She had bought a ticket for Boston. He helped Mr Ames 
write a tdegram to the Boston police. Mr Ames bought a round- 
trip ticket and caught tlic nine-fifty to Boston. He was a very 
good man in a crisis. 

That night Mrs Ames sat in the kitchen with the door 
closed. She was white and she gripped the table with her hands 
to control her shaking. The sound, first of the blows and then 
of the screaming, came clearly to her tlmough the closed doors. 

Mr Ames was not good at whipping because he had never 
done, it. He lashed at Cathy’s legs with the buggy whip, and 
when she .stood quietly staring at Itim with calm cold eyes he 
lost his temper. The first blows were tentative and timid, but 
when she did not cry he slashed at her sides and shoulders. The 
whip licked and cut. In his rage he missed her several times or 
got too close so that the whip wrapped around her body. 

, Cathy learned quickly. She found him out and knew him, and 
once she had learned she screamed, she writhed, she cried, she 
oegged, and she had the satisfaction of feeling the blows in- 
stantly become lighter. 

Mr Ames was frightened at the noise and hurt he was creat- 
stopped. Cathy dropped back on the bed, sobbing. And 
a he had looked, her father would have seen that there were no 

83 


tears in her eyes, but rather the muscles of her neck were tight 
and there were lumps )ust under her temples where the jaw 
muscles Imotted. 

He said, ‘Now will you ever do that agam ? 

‘No, oh, nol Forgive me,’ Cathy said. She turned over on the 
bed so that her father could not see the coldness in her face. 

‘See you remember who you are. And don’t forget what I 

am.’ , • 

Cathy’s voice caught. She produced a dry sob. ‘I won’t for- 
get,’ she said. 

In the kitchen Mrs Ames wrestled her hands. Her husband 
put his fingers on her shoulder. 

‘I hated to do it,’ he said. ‘I had to. And I think it did her 
good. She seems like a changed girl to me. Maybe we haven’t 
bent the twig enough. We’ve spared the rod. Maybe we were 
wrong.’ And he knesv that although his wife had insisted on the 
whipping, although she had forced him to whip Cathy, she 
hated him for doing it. Despair settled over him. 


V 

There seemed no doubt that it was what Cathy needed. As Mr 
X Ames said, 'It kind of opened her up.’ She had always been 
tractable but now she became thoughtful too. In the weeks that 
followed she helped her mother in the kitchen and offered to 
help more than was needed. She started to knit an afghan for 
her moiiicr, a large project that would take months. Mrs Ames 
told the neighbours about it. ‘She has such a fine colour sense — 
rust and yellow. She’s finished three squares already.’ 

For her father Cathy kept a ready smile. She hung up his hat 
when he came in and turned his chair properly under tlie light 
to make it easy lor him to read. 

Even in school she was changed. Always she had been a good 
student, but now she began to make plans for the future. She 
talked to the principal about examinations for her teaching cer- 
tificate, perhaps a year early. And the principal looked over her 
record and thought she might well try it with hope of success. 
He called on Mr Ames at the tannery' to discuss it. 

She didn t tell us any of this,’ Air Ames said proudly. 

Well, maybe I shouldn’t have told you. I hope I haven’t 
ruined a surprise.’ 

Mr and .Vlrs Ames felt that they had blundered on some magic 
which solved all of their problems. They put it down to an un- 

84 



conscious wisdom which comes only to parents. ‘I never saw 
such a change in a person in my life,’ Mr Ames said. 

‘But she was always a good child,’ said his wife. ‘And have 
you noticed how pretty she’s getting? Why, she’s almost beauti- 
ful. Her checks have so much colour.’ 

‘I don’t think she’ll be teaching school long, with hex looks,’ 
said Mr Ames. 

It was true that Cathy glowed. The cliildlikc smile was con- 
stantly on her lips while she went about her preparations. She 
had all the time in the world. She cleaned the cellar and stuffed 
papers all around the edges of the foundation to block the 
draught. When the kitchen door squeaked she oiled the hinges 
and then tlie lock that turned too hard, and while she had the 
oil-can out she oiled the front-door hinges too. She made it her 
duty to keep the. lamps filled and their chimneys clean. She in- 
vented a way of dipping the chtmncj's in a big can of kerosene 
she had in the basement. 

‘You’d have to sec it to believe it,’ her father said. 

And it wasn’t only at home citlicr. She braved the smell of 
the tannery to visit her father. She was just past si-vtcen and of 
course he thought of her as a baby. He was amazed at her ques- 
tions about business. 

‘She’s smarter titan some men I could name,’ he told his fore- 
man. ‘She might be running tltc business some day.’ 

She was interested not only in the tanning processes but in 
the business end too. Her father e.\'plaincd the loans, the pay- 
ments, the billing, and the pay-roll. He showed her how to open 
the safe and was pleased that after the first try' she remembered 
the combination. 

‘The way I look at it is this,’ he told his wife. ‘We’ve all of us 
got a little of the Old Nick in us. I wouldn’t want a child that 
didn’t have some giunption. The way I see it, that’s just a kind 
of energy. If you just check it and keep it in control, why, it 
will go in the right direction.’ 

Cathy mended all of her clothes and put her tilings in order. 
One day in May she came liome from school and went directly 
^ her kmtting needles. Her mother was dressed to go out. ‘I 
" 60 to the Altar Guild,’ she said. ‘It’s about the cake sale 

next week. I’m chairman. Your father wondered if you would 
^ by the banlr and pick up the money for the pay-roll and take 

to the tannery. I told him about the cake sale so I can’t 
do It.’ • 

T’d like to,’ said Cathy. 


85 



• ‘They’ll have the money ready for you in a bag,’ said Mrs 
Ames, and she hurried out. 

Cathy worked quickly but without hurry. She put on an old 
apron to cover her clothes. In the basement she found a jelly 
jar with a top and carried it out to the carriage house, where the 
tools were kept. In the chicken-yard she caught a little pullet, 
took it to the block and chopped its head off, and held the writh- 
ing neck over the jelly jar tmtil it was half full of blood. Then 
she carried the quivering pullet to the manure pile and buried it 
deep. Back in the kitchen she took off the apron and put it in 
the stove and poked the coals until a flame sprang up on the 
cloth. She washed her hands and inspected her shoes and stock- 
ings and wiped a dark spot from the toe of her right shoe. She 
looked at her face in the mirror. Her cheeks were bright with 
colour and her eyes shone and her mouth turned up in its small 
childlike smile. On her way out she hid the jelly jar under the 
lowest part of the kitchen steps. Her mother had not been gone 
even ten minutes. 

Cathy walked lightly, almost dancing, round the house and 
into the street. The trees were breaking into leaf and a fetv early 
dandelions were in yellow flower on the lawns. Cathy walked 
gaily toveards the centre of the town, where the bank was. And 
she was so fresh and pretty that people walking turned and 
looked after her when she had passed. 

VI 

The fire broke out at about three o’clock in the morning. It rose, 
flared, roared, crashed, and crumbled in on itself almost before 
anyone noticed it. When the volunteers ran up, pulling their 
hose-cart, there was nothing for them to do but wet down the 
roofs of the neighbouring houses to keep them from catching 
lire. 

The Ames house had gone up like a rocket. The volunteers 
and the ordinary audience fires attract looked around at the 
lighted faces, trying to see Air and Mrs Ames and their daugh- 
ter. It came to everyone at once that they were not there. People 
gazed at the broad ember-bed and saw themselves and , their 
children in there, and hearts rose up and pumped against 
throats. The volunteers began to dump water on the fire almost 
as though t^y might even so late save some corporeal part of 
me family. The frightened talk ran through the town that the 
whole Ames family had burned. 


86 


B}' sunrise everj’one in town was tight-packed about the smok- 
ing black pile. Those in front had to shield their faces against 
the heat. The volunteers continued to pump water to cool off 
the charred mess. By noon the coroner was able to throw wet 
planks down and probe w’ith a crowbar among the sodden heaps 
of charcoal. Enough remained of Mr and Mrs Ames , to make 
•'sure there were two bodies. Near neighbours pointed out the 
approximate place where Cathy’s room had been, but although 
the coroner and any number of helpers worked over the debris 
with a garden rake they could find no tootli or bone. 

The chief of the volunteers meanwhile had found the door- 
X knobs and lock of the kitchen door. He looked at the blackened 
metalj puzzled, but not quite knowing what puzzled him. He 
borrowed the coroner’s rake and worked furiously. He went to 
the place where tlie front door had been and raked until he 
found that lock, crooked and half melted. By now he had his 
own small crowd, who demanded, ‘What arc you looking for, 
George?’ and ‘What did i'ou find, George?’ 

Finally the coroner came over to him. ‘What’s on J’our mind, 
George?’ 

, ‘No keys in the locks,’ the chief said uneasily. 

'Maybe they fell out.’ 

‘How?’ 

‘Maybe thej' melted.' 

‘The locks didn’t melt.’ 

‘Maj'bc Bill Ames took them out.’ 

‘On the inside?’ He held up his trophies. Both bolts stuck 
out. 

Since the owner’s house was burned and the owner ostensibly 
burned with it, the anployccs of the tannery, out of respect, did 
not go to work. They hung around the burned house, offering 
to help in any way they could, feeling official and generally 
¦- getting in the way. 

-It wasn’t until afternoon that Joel Robinson, the foreman, 
went down to the tannery. He found the safe open and papers 
scattered all over the floor, A broken window showed how the 
thief had entered. 

No\w the whole complexion changed. So, it was not an acci- 
dent. Fear took the place of c.\-citement and sorrow, and anger, 
brother of fear, crept in. The crowd began to spread. 

They had not far to go. In the carriage house there was what 
is called ‘signs of a struggle’ -in this case a broken box, a shat- 
tered carriage lamp, scraped marks in the dust, and straw on 

87 



the floor. The onloohers might not have known these as signs of 
a struggle had there not been a quantity of blood on the floor. 

The constable took control. This was his province. He pushed 
and herded everyone out of the carriage house. ‘Want to gum up 
all these clues?' he shouted at them. ‘Now you all stay clear out- 
side the door.’ ' . 

He searched the room, picked up something, and in a corner 
found something else. He came to the door, holding his dis- 
coveries in his hands -a blood-spattered blue hair-ribbon and 
a cross with red stones. ‘Anybody recognize these here?’ , he 
demanded. 

In a small town where everyone knows everyone it is almost 
impossible to believe that one of your acquaintances could mur- 
der anyone. For that reason, if the signs are not pretty strong in 
a particular direction, it must be some dark stranger, some wan- 
derer from the outside world where such things happen. Then 
the hobo camps are raided and vagrants brought in and hotel 
registers scrutinized, E\ ery man who is not known is automatic- 
ally suspected. It was May, remember, and the w'andering men 
had only rccenth taken to the roads, now that the warming 
months let them spread their blankets by any tratercourse. And 
the gypsies were out too -a whole caravan less than five miles 
awav. .?Xnd what a turning out those poor gypsies got! 

The ground for miles around was searched for new-tumed 
earth, and likely pools were dragged for Cathy’s body. ‘She was 
so pretty.' overtone said, and they meant that in themselves they 
could stx- a reason for carrying Cathy off. At length a bumbling 
hairy half-wit was brought in for questioning. He was a fine 
candidate for hanging because not only did he have no alibis, he 
could not remember what he had done at any time in Itis life. 
His feeble mind sensed that these questioners wanted something 
of him and, being a friendly creature, he tried to give it to them. 
When a baited and set question was offered to him, he walked 
happily into the trap and was glad when the constable looked 
happy. He tried manfully to please these superior beings. There 
was something very nice about him. The only trouble with his 
confession was that he confessed too much in too many direc- 
tions. Also, he had constantly to be reminded of what he vtos 
supposed to have done. He was really pleased w'hen he was in- 
dicted by a stern and frightened jurv. He felt that at last he 
amounted to something. 

There were, and are, some men who become judges whose 
01 e for the law’ and for its intention of promoting justice hits 

88 


the quality of love for a woman. Such a man presided at the 
examination before plea - a man so pure and good tliat he can- 
celled out a lot of wickedness with his life. Without the prompt- 
ing tlte culprit was used to, his confession was nonsense. The 
judge questioned him and found out that although the suspect 
was trying to follow instructions he simply could not remember 
what he did, whom he killed, how or why. The judge sighed 
wearily and motioned him out of the courtroom and crooked his 
fingers at the constable. 

‘Now look here, Mike,’ he said, ‘you shouldn’t do a thing like 
that. If that poor fellow had been just a little smarter you might 
have got him hanged.’ 

‘He said he did it.’ The constable’s feelings were hurt, because 
he was a conscientious man. 

‘He would have admitted climbing the golden stairs and cut- 
ting St Peter’s tiuroat with a bowling ball,’ the judge said. ‘Be 
more careful, Mike. The law was designed to save, not to 
destroy.’ 

In all Such local tragedies time works like a damp brush on 
water-colour. The sharp edges blur, the ache goes out of it, tile 
colours melt together, and from the many separated lines a solid 
grey emerges. Within a month it was not so necessary' to hang 
someone, and witliin two months nearly everybody discovered 
that there wasn’t any real evidence against anyone. If it had not 
been for Cathy’s murder, fire and robbery might have been a co- 
incidence. Then it occurred to people that witliout Cathy’s body 
you coudn’t prove anything even though you thought she was 
dead. 

Cathy left a scent of sweetness behind her. 


CHAPTER 9 

I 

Mr Edwards carried on his business of whoremaster in an 
orderly and unemotional way. He maintained his wife and his 
Uvo well-mannered children in a good house in a good neigh- 
ourhood iu Boston. The children, two boys, were entered on 
t e books at Groton when they were infants, 

Mrs Edwards kept a dustless house and controlled her ser- 
vants. There were of course many times when Mr Edwards had 

89 


to be away from home, on business, but he managed to live an 
amazingly -domestic life and to spSid ¦ more- evenings at home 
than you could imagine. He ran his business with a public 
accountant’s neatness and accuracy. He was a large and power- 
ful man, running a little to fat in his late forties, and y&i in sur- 
prisingly good condition for a time when a man wanted to be 
fat if only to prove he was a success. 

He had invented his. business -the circuit route through the 
small towns, the short stay of each girl, the discipline, the per- ‘ 
centages. He felt his way along and made few mistakes. He never 
sent his girls into the cities. He could handle the hungry con- 
stables of the villages, but he had respect for the experienced and 
'voracious big-city police. His ideal stand was a small town with 
a mortgaged hotel and no amusements, one where his only com- 
petition came from wives and an occasional wayward girl. At 
this time he had ten units. Before he died at sixty-seven of 
strangulation on a chicken bone, he had groups of four girls in 
each of thirty-three small towns in New England. He was better 
than well fixed - he was rich; and the manner of his death was 
. in itself sjTubolic of success and well-being. 

At the present time the institution of the whorehouse seems to 
a certain e.xtent to be dying out. Scholars have various reasons to 
give. Some say that the decay of morality among girls has'dealt 
the whorehouse its death-blow. Others, perhaps more idealistic, 
maintain that police supervision on an increased scale is driving 
the houses out of existence. In the late days of the last century 
and the early part of this one, the whorehouse rvas an accepted 
if not openly discussed institution. It was said that its existence 
protected decent women. An unmarried man could go to one of 
these houses and e%'acuate the sexual energy which was making 
him uneasy and at the same time maintain the popular attitudes 
about the purity and loveliness of women. It was a mystery, but 
then tiicre are many mysterious things in our social thinking. 

These housra ranged from palaces filled with gold and velvet 
to the crummiest cribs where the stench would drive a pig away. 
Es'Cry once in a while a story would start about how young girls 
were stolen and enslaved by the controllers of the industry, and 
perhaps many of the stories were true. But the great majority of 
whores drifted into their profession through laziness and stu- 
pidity. In the bouses they had no responsibility. They were fed 
and clothed^ and taken care of until they were too old, and then 
they were locked out. This ending was no deterrent. No one who 
is yoiing is ever going to be old. 


90 



Now and then a smart girl came into the profession, but she 
isually moved up to better things. She got a house of her own 
ir worked successfully at blackmail or married a rich man. 
rhere was even a special name for the smart ones. The>f were 
3^ndly called courtesans. 

Mr Edwards had no trouble either in recruiting or in con- 
rolling his girls. If a girl was not properly stupid, he threw 
ler out. He did not want vcr\' pretty girls cither. Some local 
young man might fall in love with a pretty whore and there 
vould be hell to pay. When any of his girls became pregnant 
hey liad the choice of leaving or of being aborted so brutally 
hat a fair proportion died. In spite of this the girls usually 
:hose abortion. 

It was not always smooth sailing for Mr Edwards. He did 
fiave his problems. At tlie time of which I am telling you he had 
been subjected to a series of misfortunes. A train wreck had 
killed off nvb units of four girls each. Another of his units he 
lost to conversion when a small-town preacher suddenly caught 
fire and began igniting the townsfolk with his sermons. The 
swelling congregation had to move out of the church and into 
the fields. Then, as happens so often, the preacher turned over 
his hole-card, the sure-fire card. He predicted the date of the 
end of the world, and the whole county’ moved bleating in on 
him. Edwards went to tlte town, took the heavy quirt from 
his suitcase, and whipped the girls unmercifully; instead of see- 
ing things his way, the girls begged for more whipping to wipe 
out their fancied sins. He gave up in disgust, took their clothes, 
and went back to Boston. The girls achieved a certain promi- 
nence when they went naked to the camp meeting to confess and 
testify. That is how Mr Edwards happened to be intendewing 
and recruiting numbers of girls instead of picldng one up here 
and there. He had three units to rebuild from the ground. 

I don’t know how Cathy’ Ames heard about Mr Edwards. 
PerMps a hack driver told her. The word got around when 
a girl really wanted to know. Mr Edwards had not had a 
Eood morning when she came into his office. The pain in his 
stomach he ascribed to a halibut chowder his wife had given 
for supper the night before. He had been up all night. The 
chowder had blown both ways and he still felt weak and crampy. 
. For this reason he did not take in all at once the girl who 
^lled herself Catherine Amesbury. She was far too pretty for Ids 
usiness. Her voice rvas low' and throaty, she was slight, almost 
chcate, and her skin %vas lovely. In a word she was not Mr 


91 


. r rirl at all. If Iw not been weak he would 

Edwards !. h> j^stantly. But wliile he cbd not look at her 

liavc the routine questioning, mostly about rcla- 

very ; ht cause trouble, something in Mr Edwards’s 

r'f, il-Mn to feel her. Mr Edwards was, not n concupiscent 
, besides he never mixed his professional life witii his 

S,o f-ri? "r’- 

P" , rrirl. and.hcr eyelids dipped sweetly and 


nrivatc pleasures, rns ,.7 Tr ' ¦‘uoucc 

nnrrlcd at the girl, and.hcr eyelids dipped sweetly and mys- 
teriously, and there was just a suggration of a sw-ay on her 
SS padded hips. Her htde mouj wore a eat smile. Mr 
SSdS leaned , forward at his d^_k, breathing heavily. He 
that he wanted this one for lus own. 

•I^n’t understand why a girl like you—’ he began, and fell 
rdtinto the oldest conviction in titc 'yorid-that tS girfy 


you 


¦My f.U.» .s %yc »« « 


¦Aay tamer . 

he had let things go to ^ know he had borrowed 

money on tlie farm. And I can 1 1« the bank take - 

my mother. The shock would fall her.’ Catherine’e ” ^ 


•with'tcarsi 


- awav from 

'I thought maybeT could makr. Z ® dimmed 

the interest.’ ^UOugh to keep up 

; If ever Mr Edwards had a chance it 

bu ^2 did sound fa fas “deed a 


bed about that. And here ft- - and tiv. 


ddtacd wd. Mood ood 47s 

, , up his leff.s and 


M;>™,d, hcrf 7 ”” »"¦> 

talk this over. Maybe we can figi^fo my dear, let’s 

mterest money.’ And this to a gfai S you to get the 

job as a whore- or had she? kad simply asked, for a - 


II 


Mrs Edwards was persistently jf not nmr 
spent a great part of her time with the religious. She 

. . j^^^kames of her church. 


»_• T ^ ^ wiin uie Tnf^r>u^ • 

which did not leave her time for eith^ ^ ker ch„ 

effects. To her, Mr Edwards was fa the fa, ‘’?'=kground'or its 
even if she had known - which she probaMv°J^^® business, and 

V Ufa — vvhat business 
92 


he was really in, she would not have believed it. And this is 
anotlier mystery. Her. husband had always been to her a coldly 
thoughtful man who made few and dutiful physical demands on 
her. If he had never been warm, he had never been cruel either. 
Her dramas and her emotions had to do with the boys, with the 
vcstrj^, and with food. She was content with her life and thank- 
ful. When her husband’s disposition began to disintegrate, caus- 
ing him to be restless and snappish, to sit staring and then to 
rush out of the house in a nervous rage, she ascribed it first to 
his stomach and then to business reverses. When by accident she 
came upon him in the bathroom, sitting on the toilet and crying 
softly to himself, she knew he was a sick man. He tried quickly 
to cover his red brimming eyes from her scrutiny. When neither 
herb teas nor physics cured him she was helpless. 

If in all the years Air Edwards had heard about anyone like 
himself he would have laughed. For Mr Edwards, as cold- 
blooded a whoremaster as ever lived, had fallen hopelessly, 
miserably in love with Catherine Amcsbury. He rented a sweet 
little brick house for her, and then gave it to her. He bought her 
every imaginable luxury, ovcr-dccorated the house, kept it over- 
warm. The carpeting was too deep and the walls were crowded 
.with heavy-framed pictures. 

Mr Edwards had never e.xperienced such misery. As a matter 
of business he had learned so much about women that he did 
not trust one for a second. And since he deeply loved Catherine 
and love requires trust, he was tom to quivering fragments by 
his emotion. He had to trust her and at the same time he did not 
trust her. He tried to buy her loyalty with presents and with 
money. When he was away from her, he tortured himself with 
the tfiought of other men slipping into her house. He hated to 
leave Boston to check up on his units because this would leave 
Catherine alone. To a certain extent he began to neglect his busi- 
ness! It was his first experience with this kind of love and it 
nearly killed him. 

One thing Mr Edwards did not know, and could not know 
because Catherine would not permit it, was that she was faithful 
to him in the sense that she did not receive or visit other men. 
To Catherine, Mr Edwards was as cold a business proposition as 
his units were to him. And as he had his techniques, so had she 
hers. Once she had him, which was very soon, she managed 
always to seem lightly dissatisfied. She gave him an impression 
of restlessness, as though she might take flight at 'any moment. 
When she knew he was going to visit her, she made it a point to 

93 



be out and to' come in glowing’ as from some incredible ex- 
perience. She complained a good deal about the difficulties of 
avoiding the lecherous looks and touches of men in the street 
who could not keep away from her. Several times she ran 
frightened into the house, having barely escaped a man who had 
followed her. When she. would return in the late afternoon and 
find him waiting for her she would explain, ‘Why, I was shop- 
ping. I have to go shopping, you know.’ And she made it sound 
like a lie. 

' In their sexual relations she convinced him that the result was 
not quite satisfactory to her, that if he were a better man he 
could release a flood of tmbelievable reaction in her. Her method 
was to keep him continually off balance. She saw with satisfac- 
tion his nerves begin to go, his hands take to quivering, Iiis loss 
of weight, and the wild glazed look in his eyes. And when she 
delicately sensed the near approach of insane, punishing rage, 
she sat in his lap and soothed him and made him believe for a 
moment in her innocence. She could convince him. 

Catherine wanted money, and she set about getting it as 
quickly and as easily as she could. When she had successfully 
reduced him to a pulp, and Catherine knew exactly when the 
time had come, she began to steal, from him. She went through 
his pockets and took any large notes she fotmd. He didn’t dare 
accuse her for fear she would go away. The presents of jewellery 
he gave her disappeared, and although she said she had lost 
them, he knew they had been sold. She padded the grocery bills, 
added to the prices of clothes. He could not bring himself to 
stop it. She did not sell the house, but she mortgaged it for 
every penny she could get. 

One evening his key did not fit in the lock of the front door. 
She answered his pounding after a long time. Yes, she had 
changed the locks because she had lost her key.. She was afraid, 
living alone. Anyone could get in. She would get him another 
key -but she never did. He always- had to ring the bell after 
that, and sometimes it took a long time for her to answer, and at 
other times his ring was not answered at all. There was no way 
for him to know whether she was at home or not. Mr Edwards 
had her followed -and she did not know how often. 

Adr Edwards was essentially a simple man, but even a simple 
man has complexities which are dark and twisted. Catlierine was 
clever, but even a clever woman misses some of the strange corri- 
dors in a man. 

She made only one bad slip, and she had tried to avoid that 

94 



one. As was proper, Mr Edwards had stocked the pretty little 
nest with champagne. Catherine had from the first refused to 
touch it. 

, ‘It makes me sick,’ she explained. ‘I’ve tried it and I can’t 
drink it.’ 

‘Nonsense,’ he said. ‘Just have one glass. It can’t hurt you.’ 
‘No, thank you. No, I can’t drink it.’ 

Mr Edwards thought of her reluctance as a delicate, a ladylike 
quality. He had never insisted until one evening when it oc- 
curred to him that he knew nothing about her. Wine might 
loosen her tongue. The more he thought of it, the better the idea 
seemed to him. 

‘It’s not friendly of you not to have a glass with me.’ 

‘I tell you, it doesn’t agree with me.’ 

‘Nonsense.’ 

‘I tell you I don’t want it.’ 

‘This is silly,’ he said. ‘Do you want me to be angry with 
you?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Then drink a glass.’ 

‘I don’t want it.’ 

‘Drink it.’ He held a glass for her, and she retreated from it. 
‘You don’t Imow. It’s not good for me.’ 

‘Drink it.’ 

She took the glass and poured it down and stood still, quiver- 
ing, seeming to listen. The blood flowed to her cheeks. She 
poured another glass for herself and another. Her eyes became set 
and cold. Mr Edwards felt a fear of her. Something w’as hap- 
pening to her which neither she nor he could control. 

‘I didn’t want to do it. Remember that,’ she said calmly. 
‘Maybe you’d better not have any more.’ 

She laughed and poured herself another glass., ‘It doesn’t mat- 
ter now,’ she said. ‘More won’t make much difference.’ 

‘It’s nice to have a glass or so,’ he said uneasily. 

She spoke to him softly. ‘You fat slug,’ she said. ‘What do you 
know about me? Do you think I can’t read every rotten lliought 
you ever had? Want me to tell you? You wonder where a nice 
girl like me learned tricks. I’ll tell you. I learned them in cribs - 
you hear? - cribs. I’ve w'orked in places you never even heard of 
-four years. Sailors brought me little tricks from Port Said. I 
know every nerve in your lousy body and I can use them.’ 
‘Catherine,’ he protested, ‘you don’t know wliat you’re saying.’ 
‘I could see it. You thought I would talk. Well, I’m talking.’ . 

95 ' 



She advanced slowly towards him, and Mr Edwards over- 
came his impulse to edge away. He was afraid of h^, but he sat 
Still Directly in. front of him she drank the last champagne in 
her glass, delicately struck the rim on the table, and jammed the 

ragged edge against his cheek. 

And then he did run from the house, and he could hear her 
laughing as he went. 

lit ¦ 

Love to a man like Mr Edwards is a crippling emotion. . It 
ruined his judgement, cancelled his knowledge, weakened hint. 

¦ He told himself she was hj'sterical and tried to believe it, and it 
was made easier for him by Catherine. Her outbreak had terri- 
fied her, and for a time she. made every effort to restore his sweet 
picture of her. 

A man. so painfully in love is capable of self-torture beyond 
belief. Mr Edwards wanted with all his heart to believ'e in her 
goodness, but he was forced not to, as much by his own particu- 
lar devil as by her outbreak. Almost instinctively he went about 
learning the truth and at the same time disbelieved it. He knew, 
for instance, that she would not put her money in a bank. One 
of his employees, using a complicated set of mirrors, found out 
the place in ±e cellar of the little brick house where she, did 
keep it. 

One day a clipping came from the agency he employed. It was 
an old newspaper account of a fire from a smaU-town weekly. 
Mr Edwards studied it. His chest and stomach turned to molten 
metal and a redness glowed in his head behind his eyes. There 
was real fear mixed up in his love, and the precipitate from the 
mixing of these two is cruelty. He staggered dizzily to his office 
couch and lay face down, his forehead against the cool black 
leather. For a time he hung suspended, hardly breathing. Gradu- 
ally his brain cleared. His mouth tasted salty, and there was a 
great ache of anger in his shoulders. But he was calm and his 
mind cut its intention through time like a sharp, beam of a 
searchlight through a dark room. He moved slowly, checking his 
suitcase just as he alwaj's did when he started out to inspect his 
units — clean shirts and underwear, a night-gown and slippers, 
and the heat-y quirt with the lash curving around the end of the 
suitcase. 

He moved heavily up the little garden in front of the brick 
house and rang the bell. 


96 



Catherine answered it immediatelj'..She had on her coat and 
hat. 

‘Oh ! ’ she said. “What a shame! I must go out for a while.’ 

Mr Edwards put down his suitcase. ‘No,’ he said. 

She studied him. Something was changed. He lumbered past 
her and went down Into the cellar. 

‘Where are you.going?’ Her voice was shrill. 

He did not reply. In a moment he came up again, carrj'ing a 
small oak box. He opened his suitcase and put the box inside. 
‘That’s mine,’ she said softly. 

‘I know.' 

‘What are you up to ?’ 

'I thought we’d go for a little trip.’ 

‘Where? I can’t go.’ 

‘Little town in Connecticut. I have some business there. You 
told me once you wanted to work. You’re going to work.’ 

‘I don’t want to now. You can’t make me. Why, I’ll call the 
police!’ 

He smiled so horribly that she stepped back from him. His 
temples were thudding with blood. ‘Maybe you’d rather go to 
your home town,’ he said. ‘The}' had a big fire there several }'ears 
ago. Do you remember that fire?’ 

Her ej'es probed and searched him, seeking a soft place, but 
his eyes were flat and hard. ‘What do you want me to do?’ she 
asked quietly. 

‘Just come for a little trip with me. You said you wanted to 
work.’ 

She could think of only one plan. She must go along with 
him and trait for a chance. A man couldn’t always watch. It 
would be dangerous to thwart him now - best go along with it 
and trait. That always worked. It always Itad. But his tvords had 
given Catherine real fear. 

In the small town the}' got off the train at dusk, walked down 
its one dark street and on out into the country. Catherine was 
war}’ and watchful. She had no access to his plan. In her purse 
she had a thin-bladed knife. 

Mr Edward thought he knew what he intended to do. He 
meant to whip her and put her in one of the rooms at the inn, 
whip her and move her to another town, and so on until she 
was of no use any more. Then he would throw her out. The 
local constable would see to it that she did not run away. The 
knife did not bother him. He knew about that. 

The first thing he did when they stopped in a private place 

97 



between a stone wall and a fringe of cedars was to jerk the purse 
from her hand and throw it over the wall. That took care of the 
knife. But he didn’t know about himself, because in all his life 
he had never been in love with a woman. He thought he only 
meant to punish her. After uvo slashes the quirt was not enough. 
He dropped it on the ground and used his fists. His breathing 
came out in squealing whines. 

Catherine did her best not to fall into panic. She tried to duck ¦ 
his threshing fists or at least to make them ineffective, but at last 

¦ fear overcame her and she tried to rxm. He leaped at her and 
brought her down, and by then his fists were not enough. His 

¦ frantic hand found a stone on the ground and his cold control 
. was biurst through with a red roaring wave. 

Later he looked down on her beaten face. He listened for her 
heart-beat and could hear nothing over the thumping of his 
own; Two complete and separate thoughts ran in bis mind. 
One said, ‘Have to bury her, have to dig a hole and put her in 
it.’ And the other cried like a child, ‘I can’t stand it. I couldn’t 
bear to touch her.' Then the sickness that follovvs rage over- 
whelmed him. He ran from the place, leaving his suitcase, leav- 
ing the quirt, leaving the oak box of money. He blundered 
away in the dusk, wondering only where he could hide his sick- 
ness for a wlule. 

c-,. No question was ever asked of him. After a time of sickness to 
which his wife ministered tenderly, he went back to his business 

hd never again let the insanity of love come near him. A man 
who can’t learn from experience is a fool, he said. Always after- 
wards he had a kind of fearful respect for himself. He had never 
known that the impulse to kill was in him. 

That he had not killed Catherine was an accident. Every blow 
had been intended to crush her. She was a long time uncon- 
scious and a long time half-conscious. She realized her arm was. 
broken and she must find help if she wanted to live. Wanting to 
live forced her to drag herself along the dark road, looking for 
help. She turned in at a gate and almost made the steps of the 
house before she fainted. The roosters were crowing in the 
cliicken-house and a grey rim of dawn lay on the east. 


98 



CHAPTER 10 


I 

When two men live together they usually maintain a kind 
of shabby neatness out of incipient rage at each other. Two men 
alone are constantly on the verge of fighting, and they know it. 
Adam Trask had not been home long before the tensions began 
to build up. The brothers saw too much of each other and not 
enough of anyone else. 

For a few months they were busy getting Cyrus’s money in 
order and out at interest. They travelled together to Washington 
to look at the grave, good stone and on top an iron star with 
seal and a hole on the top in which to insert the stick for a little 
flag on Decoration Day. The brothers stood by the grave a long 
time, then they went away and they didn’t mention Cyrus. 

If Cyrus had been dishonest he had done it well. No one 
asked _ questions about the money. But the subject was on 
Charte’s mind. 

Back on the farm Adam asked him, ‘Why don’t you buy some 
new clothes? You’re a rich man. You act like you’re afraid to 
spend a penny.’ 

‘I am,’ said Charles. 

•Why?’ 

'I might have to give it back.’ 

‘Still harping on that? If there was anything wrong, don’t 
you think we’d have heard about it by now?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Charles. ‘I’d rather not talk about it.’ 

But that night he brought up the subject again. ‘There’s one 
thing bothers me,’ he began. 

‘About the money?’ 

‘Yes, about tlie money. If you make that much money there’s 
bound to be a mess.’ '' 

‘How do you mean?’ 

_ ‘Well, papers and account books and bills of sale, notes, figur- 
ing -well, we went through Father’s things and there wasn’t 
none of that.’ 

‘Maybe he burned it up.’ 

‘Maybe he did,’ said Charles. 

The brothers lived by a routine established by Charles, and he 
never varied it. Charles awakened on the stroke of four-tliirtj- as 
surely as though the brass pendulum of the clock had nudged 

99 



him. He was awake^ in fact, a split second' before four-thirty. 
His eyes were open and had blinked once before the high gong 
struck. For a moment he lay still, looking up into the darkness 
and scratching his stomach; Then he reached to the table beside 
his bed and his hand fell exactly on the block of sulphur matches 
lying there. His fingers pulled a match free and struck it on the 
side of the block.' The sulphur burned its little blue bead before., 
the wood caught. Charles lighted the candle beside his bed. He 
threw back his blanket and got up. He wore long grey under- 
wear that bagged over his knees and hung loose around his 
ankles'. Yawning, he went to the door, opened it, and called, 
‘Half past four, Adam. Time to get up. Wake up.’ 

Adam’s voice was muffled. ‘Don’t you ever forget?’ 

‘It’s time to get up.’ Charles slipped his legs into his trousers 
and hunched them up over his hips. ‘You don’t have to.ger up,’ 
he said. ‘You’re a rich man. You can lay in bed all day.’ 

¦ 'So are you. But we still get up before daylight.’ 

‘You don’t have to get up,’ Charles repeated. ‘But if you’re 
going to farm, you’d better farm.’ 

Adam said ruefully, ‘So we’re going to buy more. land so we ' 
can do more work.’ 

. ‘Come off it,’ said Charles. ‘Go back to bed if you want 
to.’ 

Adam said, ‘I bet you couldn’t sleep if you stayed in bed. You 
know what I bet? I bet you get up because you want to, and 
then you take credit for it - like taking credit for six fingers.’ 

Charles went into the kitchen and lighted the lamp. ‘You can't 
lay in bed and run a farm,’ he said, and he knocked the ashes 
through the grate of the stove and tore some paper over the 
- exposed coals and blew until the flame started. 

Adam was watching him through the door. ‘You wouldn’t 
use a match,’ he said. 

Charles turned angrily. ‘You mind your own goddam busir 
ness. Stop picking at me.’ 

All right,’ said Adam. ‘I will. And maybe my business isn’t 
here.’ 

That s up to you. Anj’ time you want to get out, you go 
right ahead.’ 

The quairel was silly but Adam couldn't stop if.' His voice 
went on without his willing it, making angry and irritating 
words. You re damn right I’ll go when I want,’ he said. ‘This 
IS my place as much as yours.’ 

‘Then why don’t you do some work on it?’ 

100 



‘Oh, Lord!’ Adam said. ‘What arc wc fussing about? J.ct’s 
not fuss.’ 

, ‘I don’t want trouble,’ said Charles. He scooped lukewarm 
mush into two bowls and spun them on the table. 

The brothers sat down. Cliarlcs buttered a slice of bread, 
gouged out a knifeful of Jam and spread it over the butter. He 
dug butter for his second slice and left a slop of jam on the 
butter roll. 

‘Goddam it, can’t you wipe your knife? Look at that butter]’ 

Charles laid his knife and the bread on the table and placed 
his hands palm down on either side. ‘You better get off the 
place,’ he said. 

Adam got up. ‘I’d rather live in a pigsty/ he said, and he 
tvalkcd out of the house. 



logSj over two hundred, arms and legs sticking out. And vve 
piled brush on top and poured coal oil on.’ 

‘I’ve heard they can’t stand smallpox.' 

‘It kills thein,’ said Adam. ‘You’re burning the bacon.’ 

¦ Charles turned quickly back to the stove. ‘It’ll just be crisp,’ 
he said, ‘I like it crisp.’ He shovelled the bacon out on a plate 
and broke the eggs in the hot grease and they jumped and flut- 
tered their edges to brown lace and made clucking sounds. 

‘There was ai school-teacher,’ Charles said. ‘Prettiest thing you 
ever saw. Had little tiny feet. Bought all her clothes in New 
York. Yellow loair, and you never saw such little feet. Sang too, 
in tlie choir. Everybody took to going to church. Damn near 
stampeded getting into church. That was quite a while ago.’ 

• ‘ ’Bout the time you wrote about thinking of getting married?’ 

Charles grinned. ‘I guess so. I guess there wasn’t a young 
. buck in the countj' didn’t get the marrying fever.’ 

‘Wliat happened to her?' 

‘Well, you know how it is. The women got kind of restless 
with her here. They got together. First thing you knew they had 
her out. I heard she wore silk underwear. Too hoity-toity. 
School board had her out half way through the term. Feet no 
longer than that. Showed her ankles too, like it was an acci- 
dent. Always showing her ankles.’ 

‘Did j’ou get to know her?’ 

‘No. I only went to church. Couldn’t hardly get in. Girl that 
pretty’s no right in a little town. Just makes people uneasy. 
Causes trouble.’ 

Adam said, ‘Remember that Samuels girl? She was real pretty. 
What liappcned to her?’ 

‘Sanie thing. Just caused trouble. She went away. I heard she’s 
living in Philadelphia. Does dressmaking. I heard she gets ten 
dollars just for making one dress.’ 

‘Ma5he we ought to get away from here,’ Adam said. 

Charles said, ‘Still thinking of California?’ 

‘I guess so.’ 

Charles s temper tore in two, ‘I want you out of here ! ’ he 
shouted. ‘I want you to get off the place. I’ll buy you or sell you 
or anything. Get out, you son-of-a-bitch — ’He stopped. ‘I guess 
I don t mean that last. But goddam it, you make me nervous.’ 

TU go,’ said Adam. 


104 


In three months Charles cot o cc.ocrra rsrrj"- 
bay at Rio, and Adam had -.vrittcr. cn the rath a 
pen, ‘It’s summer here v.ben it's trir.ter mere. ' 
come down?’ 

Sk months iatcr there was another card, freer 
‘Dear Charles - my God this is 2 b:z c::y. 1. nr 
and Spanish both. I’m rendins tou 2 booh.' 

But no book came. Charles looked, for it al 
winter and well into the sprtne. And instead of 
arrived. He was brown and his cloti-.ea had a fc: 

‘How are you?’ Charles asked. 

Tine. Did vou get the book?’ 

‘No.’ 




t « 

;c 


‘I wonder what happened to it? It hnd nirrurca.’ ' 

‘Going to stay?’ 

‘I guess so. I’ll tell you about that country.’ 

‘I don’t want to hear about it,' said Charles. 

‘Christ, you’re mean,’ said Adam. 

‘I can just see it all over again. You’ll stay around a year nr 
so and then you’ll get restless and you’ll make me rcsticns. Yrc’il 
get mad at each other and then we’ll get polite to each, other - 
and that's worse. Then wc’II blow up and you’ll go away again, 
and then you’ll come back and we’H do it all over again.' 

Adam asked, ‘Don’t you want me to stay?’ 

‘Hell, j-es,’ said Charles. ‘I miss you when you’re not iverc. But 
I can sec how it’s going to be just the same.’ 

And it was just that way. For a while they reviewed old thne-?, 
for a while they recounted the times svhen they were apart, and 
finally they lapsed into the long ugly silences, the Itours of 
^whless work, the guarded counes)', the fiashes of anger. 

There were no boundaries to lime, so that it '.ecmed endless 
passing. 

On an evening Adam said, 'You know. I’m going to be thirty- 
set’en. That’s half a life.’ 

Hctc it comes,’ said Charles. ‘Wasting your life. Look, Adam, 
could we not have a fighf this dme?’ ’ ! 

‘How do you mean?’ 

Well, if we run true to form we’ll fight for three or four 
^ 1 ^) getting you ready to go away. If you’re getting restless, 
couldn’t you just go away and save all the trouble?’ 



Adam laughed and the tension went out of the room. ‘I’ve got 
a pretty smart brother,’ he said. ‘Sure, when I get the itch bad 
enough I’ll go without fighting. Yes, I like that. You fe getting 
ricli, aren’t you, CharlK?’ 

¦ ‘I’m doing all right. I wouldn’t say rich.’ . - 

‘You wouldn’t say you bought four buildings and the inn in 

the village?’ 

‘No, I wouldn’t say it.’ 

‘But you did. Charles, you’ve made this about the prettiest 
farm anywhere about. Why don’t we build a new house -bath- 
tub and running water and a water-closet? We’re not poor 
people any more. Why, they say you’re nearly the richest man 
. in this section.’ ' ' ¦ ' 

‘We don’t, need a new house,’ Charles said gruffly. ‘You take 
your' fancy ideas away.’ 

‘It would be nice to go to the toilet without going outside.’ 
‘You take j'our fancy ideas away.’ 

Adam was amused. ‘Maybe I’ll build a pretty little house right 
over by the wood-lot Say, how would that be? Then we 
wouldn’t get on each other’s nerves.’ 

¦ ‘I don’t want it on the place.’ 

‘The place is half mine.’ 

‘I’ll buy you out.’ 

‘But I don’t have to sell.’ 

Charles’s eyes blazed. ‘I’ll burn your goddam house down.’ 

1 ¦ ‘I believe you would,’ Adam said, suddenly sobered. ‘I be- 
lieve you really would, '^^hat are you looking like that for?’ 

Charles said slowly, ‘I’ve thought about it a lot. And I’ve 
wanted for you to bring it up. I guess you aren’t ever going to.’ 
‘What do you mean?’ 

‘You remember when you sent me a telegram for a hundred 
dollars?’ 

‘You bet I do. Saved my life, I guess. Why?’ 

‘You never paid it back.’ 

‘I must have.’ 

‘You didn’t.’ 

Adam looked down at the old table where Cyrus had sat, 
knocking on his wooden leg with a stick. And the old oil-lamp 
was lianging over tlie centre of the table, shedding its unstable 
yellow light from the round Rochester wick., 

Adam said slowly, ‘I’ll pay you in the morning.’ 

‘I gave you plenty of time to offer.’ 

Sure you did, Charles. I should have remembered.' He 
106 



paused, considering, and at last he said, ‘You don’t know why I 
needed the money.’ 

‘I never asked.’ 

‘And I never told. Maybe I was ashamed. I was a prisoner, 
Charles. I broke jail - 1 escaped.’ 

Charles’s mouth was open. ‘What are you talking about?’ 

‘I’m going to tell you. I was a tramp and I got taken up for 
vagrancy and put on a road gang -leg-irons at night. Got out 
in six months and picked right up again. That’s how they get 
their roads built. I served three days less titan the second six 
months and tlien I escaped - got over the Georgia line, robbed a 
store for clothes, and sent you the telegram.’ 

‘I don’t believe you,’ Charles said. ‘Yes, I do. You don’t tell 
lies. Of course I believe you. Why didn’t you tell me?’ 

‘Maybe I was ashamed. But I’m more ashamed that I didn’t 
pay you.’ 

‘Oh, forget it,’ said Charles. ‘I don’t know why I mentioned 
it.’ 

‘Good God, no. I’ll pay you in the morning.’ 

‘I’ll be damned,’ said Charles. ‘My brother a jail-bird ! ’ 

‘You don’t have to look so happy.’ 

‘I don’t know why,’ said Charles, ‘but it makes me kind of 
proud. My brother a jail-bird! Tell me tliis, Adam -why did 
you wait till just three daj's before they let you go to make j^our 
break?’ 

Adam smiled. ‘Two or tliree reasons,’ he said. ‘I was afraid if 
I served out my time, why, they’d pick me up again. And I 
figured if I waited till the end they wouldn’t axpcct me to run 
avvay.’ 

‘That makes sense,’ said Charles. ‘But you said there was one 
more reason.’ 

¦ ‘I guess the other was the most important,’ Adam said, ‘and 
it’s the hardest to explain. I figured I owed the state six months. 
That was the sentence. I didn’t feel right about cheating. I only 
cheated three days.’ 

Charles exploded with laughter. ‘You’re a crazy son-of-a- 
. bitch,’ he said with affection. ‘But you say you robbed a store.’ 
‘I sent the money back with ten per cent interest,’ Adam said. 
Charles leaned forward. ‘Tell me about the road gang, Adam.’ 
. ‘Sure I will, Charles. Sure I will.’ 


107 


CHAPTER 1 1 


. ¦ I. 

Charles had more respect for Adam after he knew about 
the prison. He felt the warmth for bis brother you can feel only 
for one who is not perfect and therefore no target for your 
hatred. Adam took some advantage of it too. He tempted Charles. 

‘Did you ever think, Charles, that we’ve got enough money to 
do anything we want to do?’ 

‘All right, what do we want?’ 

‘We could go to Europe, we could walk around Paris.’ 

‘Wilt’s that?’ 

‘What’s what?’ 

‘I thought I heard someone on the stoop.’ 

‘Probably a cat.’ 

‘I guess so. Have to kill off some of them pretty soon.’ 

‘Charles, we could go to Egypt and walk around the Sphinx.’ 
‘We could stay right here and make some good use of our 
money. And we could get to hcU out to work and make some use 
of the day. Those goddam cats!’ Charles jumped to the door 
and yanked it open and said, ‘Get!’ Then he was silent, and 
Adam saw him staring at the steps. He moved beside him. 

A dirty bundle of rags and mud was trying to worm its way 
up the steps. One skinn}’’ hand clawed slowly at the stairs. The 
other dragged helplessly. There was a caked face with cracked ' 
lips and eyes peering out of swollen, blackened lids. The fore- 
head was laid open, oozing blood back into the matted hair. 

Adam went down the stairs and kneeled beside the figure. 
‘Give me a hand,’ he said. ‘Come on, let’s get her in. Here— look 
out for that arm. It looks broken.’ 

She fainted when thej’ carried her in. 

‘Put her in my bed,’ Adam said. ‘Now I think j'ou better go 
for the doctor.’ 

‘Don’t you think we better hitch up and take her in?’ 

‘Move her? No. Are you crazy?’ 

Ma 3 ’be not as crazy as you. Think about it a minute.’ 
‘For.God’s sake, think about what?’ 

Two men living alone and they’ve got this in their house.’ 
Adam was shocked. ‘You don’t mean it.’ 

‘I- mean it all right. I think we better take her in. It’ll be all 
over the county in nvo hours. How do you know what she is? 

108 



How’d she get here? What happened to her? Adam, j-ou'rc tak- 
ing an awful chance/ 

Adam said coldly, ‘If you don’t go now. I’ll go and leave you 


here.* 

‘I think you’re making a mistake. I’ll go, but I tell you we’i! 
suffer for it.’ 

‘I’ll do the suffering,’ said Adam. ‘You go. 

’ After Charles left, Adam went to the kitch.en and poured I'.oi 
water from the tea-kenle into a basin. In his bedresom he 
dampened a handkerchief in the water and loosened the caked 
blood and dirt on the girl’s face. She reded up to consemu'^ne;-- 
and her blue eves glinted at him. His mind went b.-!ek-:T \'.as 
this room, this bed. His step-mother was standing over him with 
a damp cloth in her hand, and he could tee! tne little running 
pains as the water cut through. And she lead said semcthinn 
over and over. He heard it, but he could not rememeer vnat it 


was. 

‘You’ll be all right,’ he said to the girl. ‘We're retting d >et t. 
He’ll be.here right off.’ 

Her lips moved a little. 

‘Don’t try to talk,’ he said. ‘Den*: trs' t.i say entehintt.' /v h: 
worked gently with his cloth a h-ert x-a~th crept over i.im. 
‘You can stay here,’ he said. ‘Ycu can stay hr-a a' irr.r a-, y 'u 
trant I’ll take care of you.’ He tcueerai cut th: c.' th ;;rd 
sponged her matted hair and lifted it rat th: rr..'hr i.-. h~ 
scalp. 

He could hear himself talking as h: w,rrk.;i. 
he were a stranger listening. ‘There, dor that hert- Thr p- - * 
eyes-ni put some brovm paper over v:-_r e-'r . -r 

right. That’s a bad one on TCur forehead. I'm a*r.: L .h:' e 
a scar there. Could you tdi me veer rx-n-.e’' ?/:. h 
There’s lots of time, The.rc’s lots c: f~;- T-; Lr- 

That’s the doctor’s rig. Wasn’t the* •'ni-'''''’ »'•' = • - 

kitchen door. ‘In here. Doc. She’s in he txi led , ~ 


It 

She was very badlv hurt. If tk-^* ‘ne- Ser 
the doctor might have found mere h-/nri' 
was he found enough. Her H* a~. ar * ' 
and her jaw was cradled K-^ " --- 

teeth on the left side wen: rrl-b- ‘ - 

.torn and her forehead laid open m the /nh; 

iOC- 


'A, :.r' 



could see and identify. He set her arm, taped her ribs, and sewed 
up her scalp. With a pipette and an alcohol flame he bent a glass 
tube to go through the aperture where a tooth was missing so 
that she could drink and take liquid food without moving her 
cracked jaw. He gave her a large shot of morphine, left a bottle 
of opium pills, washed his hands, and put on his coat.' His 
patient v/as asleep before he left the room. 

In the kitchen he sat down at fhe table and drank the hot 
coffee Charles put in front of him. 

‘All right, what happened to her?’ he asked. 

‘How do we know?’ Charles said truculently. ‘We found her 
on our porch. If you want to see, go look at the marks on the 
road where she dragged herself.’ 

‘Know who she is?’ 

‘God, no.’ 

‘You go upstairs at the inn - is she anybody from there?’ 

‘I haven’t been there lately. I couldn’t recognize her in that 
condition, aniway.’ 

The doctor turned his head towards Adam. ‘You ever see her 
before?’ 

Adam shook his head slowly. 

Charles said harsiily, ‘Say, what you mousing around at?’ 

‘I’ll tell you, since you’re interested. That girl didn’t fall 
imder a harrow even if she looks that way. Somebody did that 
to her, somebody who didn’t like her at all. If you %vant the 
truth, somebody tried to kill her.’ 

‘Why don’t you ask her?’ Charles said. 

‘She won’t be talking for quite a while. Besides, her skull is' 
cracked, and God knows what that will do to her. What I’m 
. getting at is, should I bring the sheriff into it?’ 

‘No ! ’ Adam spoke so e.xplosively that tlie two looked at him. 
‘Let her alone. Let her rest.’ 

‘Who’s going to take care of her?’ 

‘I am,’ said Adam. 

‘Now, you look here — ’ Charles began. 

‘Keep out of it ! ’ 

‘It’s my place as much as yours.’ 

‘Do 5'ou want me to go?’ 

‘I didn’t mean that.’ 

‘Well, ril go if she has to go.’ 

The doctor said, ‘Steady down. What makes you so inter- 
ested? 

‘I wouldn’t put a hurt dog out.’ 

110 


‘You wouldn’t get mad about it either. Are you holding some- 
thing back? Did you go out last night? Did you do it?’ 

‘He was here all night/ said Charles. ‘He snores like a god- 
dam train.’ 

Adam said, ‘Why can’t you let her be? Let her get well.’ 

Tlie doctor stood up and dusted his hands. ‘Adam/ he said, 
‘your father was one of my oldest friends. I know you and your 
family. You aren’t stupid. I don’t Imow why t'ou don’t recognize 
ordinary facts, but j'ou don’t seem to. Have to talk to you like a 
baby. That girl was assaulted. I believe whoe^'er did it tried to 
kill her. If I don’t tell the sheriff about it, I’m breaking the law. 
I admit I break a few, but not that one.’ 

‘Well, tell him. But don’t let him bother her until she’s 
better.’ 

‘It’s not my habit to let my patients be bothered/ the doctor 
said. ‘You still want to keep her here?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Your funeral. I’ll look in tomorrow. She’ll sleep. Give her 
water and warm soup through the tube if she tvants it.’ He 
stalked out. 

Charles turned on his brother. ‘Adam, for God’s sake, what is 
this?’ 

‘Let me alone. 

‘What’s got into you?’ 

‘Let me alone -you hear? Just let me alone.’ 

"‘Christ!’ said Charles, and spat on the floor and went rest- 
lessly and uneasily to work, 

Adam was glad he was gone. He moved about the kitchen, 
washed the breakfast dishes, and swept the floor. When he had 
put the kitchen to rights he went in and drew a chair up to tlie 
bed. The girl snored thicldy through the morphine. The swell- 
ing was going down on her face, but the eyes were blackened 
and swollen. Adam sat very still, looking at her. Her set and 
splinted arm lay on her stomach, but her right arm lay on top 
of the coverlet, the fingers curled like a nest. It was a child’s 
hand, almost a baby’s hand. Adam touched her wrist with his 
finger, and her fingers moved a little in reflex. Her wrist was 
warm. Secretly then, as though he were afraid he might be 
caught, he straightened her hand and touched the little cushion 
pads on the fingertips. Her fingers were pink and soft, but the 
sldn on the back of her hand seemed to have an undcrbloom 
like a pearl. Adam chuckled with delight. Her breathing stopped 
and he became electrically alert - then her throat clicked and the 

111 



rhythmcd snoring continued. Gently he worked her hand and 
arm under the cover before he tiptoed out of the room. 

For several days Cathy lay in a cave of shock and opium. 
Her skin felt like lead, and she moved very little because of the 
pain. She was aware of movement around her. Gradually her 
head and her eyes cleared. Two young men were with her, one 
occasionally and the other a great deal. She knev that another 
man who came in was the doctor, and there was also a tall lean _ 
man, who interested her more than any of the others, and the 
interest grew out of fear. Perhaps in her drugged sleep she had 
picked something up and stored it 

Very slowly her mind assembled the last days and rearranged 
them. She saw the face of Mr Edwards, saw it lose its placid 
self-sufficiency and dissolve into murder. She had never been so 
afraid before in her life, but she had learned fear now. And her 
mind sniffed about like a rat looking for an escape, Mr Edwards 
Imew about the fire. Did am one else- ,^nd how did he know? 
A blind nauseating terror ro'-e in her when she thought of 
that. 

From things she lu ard die learned th.it the tall man was the 
sheriff and wanted to question her, and that the young man 
named Adam \'..is (votcvting her from the questioning. Maybe 
the sheriff kne\\ about the fire. 

Raised \0Kes gas e her the cue to hei method. The sheriff said, 
‘.She mu't base .1 n.ime, .Sumebodv must know her.’ ' 

'T-io'.', ansuer' Her jaw is broken.’ Adam’s voice. 

I) 'he ' r igl'.t-lianded 'he could spell out the answers. Lpok 
lier. . .\dam. it sumeirody tried to kill her I’d better catch him 
ubiie I sail, lust gite me a pencil and let me talk to her.’ 

.^dam '.ud. 'iitu heard the doetur sae her skull was cracked, 
fhiw do '.ou know she can remember-’ 

'W ell. -.on ai'.i. me .1 p.iper .irid pencil and we’ll see.’ 

'I don’t w.ini \,.u 10 bothi r her ' 

.-\dam, godd.ini it. 11 di^esn't matter what vou want. I’m tell- 
ing \ou I want ,i pajsei and pencil ' 

Iheii the other \i.uns inan's VDiec 'What’s the matter with 
>ou' ^ou make it sound like it was vou who did it. Give him a 
pencil.’ 

She had her eses closed when the three men came quietly into 
her room. 

‘She’s asleep,' Adam w hispered. 

She opened her eves and looked at them. 

The tall man came to the side of the bed. ‘I don’t want to 

n: 


bother you. Miss. Fm the sheriff. I know you can’t talk, but 
will you just write some thmgs on this?’ 

She tried to nod and winced with pain. She blinked her eyes 
rapidly to indicate assent. 

‘That’s the girl,’ said the sheriff. ‘You 'see? She wants to.’ He 
put the tablet on the bed beside her and moulded her fingers 
around the pencil. ‘There we are. Now. What is your name?’ 

The three men watched her face. Her mouth grew thin and 
her eyes squinted. She closed her eyes and the pencil began to 
move. ‘I don’t know,’ it scrawled in huge letters. 

‘Here, now there’s a fresh sheet. What do you remember?’ 

‘All black. Can’t think,’ the pencil wrote before it went over 
the edge of the tablet. 

‘Don’t you remember who you are, where you came from? 
Think!’ 

She seemed to go through a great struggle and then her face 
gave up and became tragic. ‘No. Mi.ved up. Help me.’ 

‘Poor child,’ the sheriff said. ‘I thank you for trjnng, anyway. 
When you get better we’ll try again. No, you don’t have to write 
any more.’ 

The pencil wrote, ‘Thank you,’ and fell from her fingers. 

She had won the sheriff. He ranged himself with Adam. Only 
Charles was against her. When the brotliers were in her room, 
and it took two of them to help her on the bed-pan without 
hurting her, she studied Charles’s dark sullenness. He had some- 
thing in his face that she recognized, that made her uneasy. She 
' that he touched the scar on his forehead very often, rubbed 
It, and drew its outline with his fingers. Once he caught her 
watching. He looked guiltily at his fingers. Charles said brutally, 
“Don’t you worry. You’re going to have one like it, maybe even 
a better one.’ 

She smiled at him, and he looked away. When Adam came in 
with her warm soup Charles said, ‘I’m going in town and drink 
some beer.’ 


Ill 

Adam couldn’t remember ever- having been so happy. It didn’t 
bother him that he did not know her name. She had said to call 
ber Cathy, and that was enough for him. He cooked for Cathy, 
going through recipes used by his mother and his step-mother. 

Cathy’s vitality was great. She began to recover very quickly. 
The swelling went out of her cheeks and the prettiness of 

113 



convalescence came to her face. In a short time she could be 
helped to a sitting position. She opened and closed her-niouth 
very carefully, and she began to eat soft foods that required little 
chewing. The bandage was still on her forehead, but the rest of 
her face was little marked axcept for the hollow check on the 
side where the teeth were missing. 

Cathy was in trouble and her mind ranged for a way out of it. 
She spoke little, even when it was not so difficult. 

One afternoon she heard someone moving around in the kit- 
chen. She called, ‘Adam, is it you?’ 

Charles’s voice answered, ‘No, it’s me.’ 

oK^ould you come in here just for a minute, please?’ 

He stood in the doorway. His eyes were sullen. 

¦‘You don’t come in much,’ she said. 

'That’s right.’ 

‘You don’t like me.’ 

‘I guess that’s right too.’ 

•Will you tell me why?’ 

He struggled to find an answer. ‘I don’t trust you,’ 

•Why not?’ 

'I don’t know. And I don’t believe you lost your memory.’ 
'But why should I lie?’ 

‘I don’t know. That’s why I don’t trust you. There’s some- 
tiling - 1 almost recognize.* 

‘You never saw me in your life.’ 

'Maybe not. But there’s something that bothers me -that I 
\ ought to know. And how do you know I never saw youl*’ 

She was silent, and he moved to leave. ‘Don’t go,’ she said. 
‘What do you intend to do?’ 

'About what?’ 

‘About me.’ 

He regarded her with a new interest. ‘You want the truth?’ 
'Why else should I ask?’ 

I don t know, but I’ll tell you. I’m going to get you out of 
here just as soon as I can. My brother’s turned fool, but I’ll 
bring him round if I have to lick him.’ 

‘Could you do that ? He’s a big man.’ 

‘I could do it.’ 

She regarded him Icvclly. ‘Where is Adam?’ 

|Gonc m town to get some more of your goddam medicine.' 

1 ou re a mean man.’ 


‘You know what I think? 
you are under that nice skin. 


I don’t think I’m half as mean as 
I think you’re a dci'il.* 


114 



She laughed softly. ‘That makes two of us/ she said. ‘Charles,- 
how long do I have?’ 

‘For w'hat?’ 

‘How long before you put me out? Tell me truly.’ 

‘All right, I v.'ill. About a week or ten da3-s. Soon as you can 
get around.’ 

‘Suppose I don’t go.’ 

He regarded her craftily, almost with pleasure at the thought 
of combat. ‘All right. I’ll tell t’ou. When t'ou had all that dope 
you talked a lot, like in your sleep.’ 

‘I don’t believe that.’ 

He laughed, for he had seen the quick tightening of her mouth- 
‘All right, don’t. And if you just go about \'our business as- 
soon as j'ou can, I won’t tell. But if you don’t, you’ll know all 
right, and so v.dll the sheriff.’ 

‘I don’t believe I said anything bad. What could I say?’ 

‘I won’t argue with you. And I’ve got work to do. You asked 
me and I told you.’ 

He went outside. Back of the hen-house he leaned over and 
laughed and slapped his leg. ‘I thought she was smarter/ he said 
to himself. And he felt more easy than he had for days. 

IV 

Charles bad frightened her badlj'. And if he had rccognmed her, 
so had she recognized him. He was the only person she had ever 
met who played it her way’. Cathy followed his thinking, and it 
did not reassure her. She knew that her tricks would not work 
with him, and she needed protection and rest. Her money was 
gone. She had to be sheltered, and would have to be, for a long 
time. She was tired and sick, but her mind went skipping 
among possibilities. 

Adam came back from town with a bottle of Pain Killer. He 
poured a tablespoonful. ‘This will taste horrible,’ he said. ‘It’s 
good stuff though.’ 

She took it without protest, did not even make much of a 
face about it. ‘You’re good to me,’ she said. ‘I wonder why'. I’ve 
brought you trouble,’ 

You have not. You’ve brightened up the whole house. FTever 
complain or anything, hurt as bad as you are.’ 

You’re so good, so kind.’ 

' ‘I w'ant to be.’ 

T)o you have to go out? Couldn’t you stay and talk to me?’ 

115 



‘Sure I could. There’s nothing so imjrortant to do.’ 

‘Draw up a chair, Adam, and sit dou>n.’_ 

When he was seated she stretched her right hand towards him, 
and he took it in both of his. ‘So good and kind, she rj^jcated; 

‘Adam, you keep promises, don’t you?’ 

¦‘I trjr to. What are you thinking about?’ 

Tm alone and I’m afraid,’ she cried. Tm afraid.’ 

‘Can’t I help you?’ 

‘I don’t think anyone can help me.’ 

‘Tell me and let me try.’ 

‘That’s the worst part. I can’t even teU you.’ 

‘Why not? If it’s a secret I won’t tell it.’ 

‘It’s not my secret, don’t you see?’ 

‘No, I don’t.’ 

Her fingers gripped his hand tightly. ‘Adam, I didn’t ever 
lose ray memory.’ 

‘Then why did you say — ’ 

‘That’s what I’m tr}'ing to tell you. Did you love jmur father, 
Adam?’ 

‘I guess I revered him more than loved him.’ 

'Well, if someone you revered were in trouble, wouldn’t j’ou 
do anything to save him from destruction?’ 

‘Well, sure. I guess I would.' 

‘Well, that’s how it is with me.’ 

‘But how did you get hurt?’ 

‘That’s part of it. That’s why I can’t tell.’ 

¦ii, ‘Was it 5’our father?’ 

‘Oh, no. But it’s all tied up together.’ 

‘You mean, if }"Ou tell me who hurt you, then your father will 
be in trouble?’ 

She sighed. He would make up the story himself. ‘Adam, will 
, you trust me?’ 

‘Of course.’ 

‘It’s an awful thing to ask.' 

‘No, it isn’t, not if you’re protecting your father.’ 

¦You understand, it’s not my secret. If it were I’d tell you in 
a minute.’ 

‘Of course I understand. I’d do the same thing myself.’ 

Oh, you understand so much,’ Tears welled up in her eyes 
He leaned dorvn towards her, and she kissed him on tlie cheek. 
‘Don’t you wony,’ he said, ‘I’ll take care of j’ou.’ 

She lay back against the pillow. ‘I don’t think you can.’ 
‘What do you mean?’ 


116 



‘Well, 3'our brother doesn’t like me. He wants me to get out of 
here.’ 

‘Did he tell you that?’ 

‘Oh, no. I can just feel it. He hasn’t your understanding.’ 

, .‘He has a good heart.’ 

‘I know that, but he doesn’t have j'our kindness. And when I 
have to go -the sheriff is going to begin asking questions and 
rU be all alone.’ 

He stared into space. ‘My brotlicr can’t make j^ou go. I own 
half of this farm. I have mj' own mone}'.* 

‘If he wanted me to go I would have to. I can’t spoil your 
life.’ 

Adam stood up and strode out of the room. He went to the 
back door and looked out on the afternoon. Far off in the field 
his brother was lifting stones from a sled and piling them on 
the stone wall. Adam looked up at the sky. A blanket of herring 
clouds was rolling in from the east. He sighed deeply and his 
breath made a tickling, c.\-citing feeling in his chest. His cars 
seemed suddenly clear, so tliat he heard the chickens cackling 
and the east wind blowing o%'’er the ground. He heard horses’ 
hoofs plodding on the road and far-off pounding on wood 
where a neighbour was shingling a barn. And all these sounds 
related into a kind of music. His eyes were clear too. Fences and 
walls and sheds stood staunchly out in the yellow afternoon, 
and they were related too. There was change in eveiy^thing. A 
flight of sparrows dropped into the dust and scrabbled for bits 
of food and then flew off like a grej' scarf twisting in the light. 
Adam looked back at his brother. He had lost track of time and 
he did not know how long he had been standing in the doorwaj'. 

No time had passed. Charles was still struggling with the 
same large stone. And Adam had not released the full, held 
breath he had taken when time stopped. 

Suddenly he knew joy and sorrow felted into one fabric. 
Courage and fear were one thing too. He found that he had 
started to hum a droning little tune. He turned, walked through 
the kitchen, and stood in the doorwaj^, looking at Cathy. She 
smiled wealdy at him, and he thought. What a child! What a 
helpless child ! and a surge of love filled him. 

‘Will jmu marry me?’ he asked. 

Her face tightened and her hand closed convulsively. 

You don’t have to tell me now,’ he said. ‘I want you to think 
about it. But if you- would marry me I could protect you. No 
one could hurt you again.’ 


117 



:Cathy tecovered an instant. ‘Come here, Adam. There, sit 
down. Here, give me your hand. That’s good, that’s right. She 
raised his hand and put the back of it against her cheek. ‘My , 
dear,’ she said brokenly. ‘Oh, my dear. Look, Adam, you have 
trusted me. Now will you promise me something? Will j'ou 
promise not to tell your brother you have asked me?’ 

‘Ask you to marry me? Why shouldn’t I?’ 

‘It’s not that. I want this night to think. I’ll want maybe more 
than this night. Could you let me do that?’ She raised her hand 
to her head. ‘You know. I’m not sure I can think straight. And 
I want to.’ 

'Do you think you might marry me?’ 

•Please, Adami Let me alone to think. Please, my dear.’ 

He smiled and said nervously, ‘Don’t make it long. I’m kind 
of like a cat up a tree so far he can’t come down.’ 

‘Just let me think. And, Adam - you’re a kind man.’ 

He went outside and walked towards where his brother was 
loading stones. 

When he was gone Cathy got up from her bed and moved 
unsteadily to the bureau. She leaned forward and looked at her 
face. The bandage was still on her forehead. She raised the edge 
of it enough to sec the angry red underneath. She had not. only 
made up her mind to marry Adam but she had so decided before 
he had asked her. She was afraid. She needed protection and 
money. Adam could give her both. And she could control him- 
she knew that. She did not want to be married, but for the time 
being it was a refuge. Only one thing bothered her. Adam had a 
'' warmth towards her which she did not understand since she- 
had none towards him, nor had ever experienced it towards any- 
one. And Mr Edwards had really frightened her. That had been 
the only time in her life she had lost control of a situation. She 
determined never to let it happen again. She smiled to herself 
when she thought what Charles would say. She felt a kinship to 
Charles. She didn’t mind his suspicion of her. 

V 

Charles straightened up when Adam approached. He put his 
palms against the small of his back and massaged the tired 
muscles. ‘My God, there’s lots of rocks,’ he said. 

‘Fellow in the army told me there’s valleys in California - 
rniles and miles - and you can’t find a stone, not even a little 
one.’ 


IIS 


‘There’ll be something else/ said Charles. T don’t think there’s 
any farm without something wrong with it. Out in the Middle 
West it’s locusts, someplace else it’s tornadoes. What’s a few 
stones?’ 

‘I guess you’re right. I thought I would give you a hand.’ 

‘That’s nice of you. I thought you’d spend the rest of your life 
holding hands with that in there. How long is she going to 
stay?’ 

Adam was on the point of telling lum of his proposal, but the 
tone of Charles’s voice made him change his mind. 

‘Say,’ Charles said, ‘Alex Platt came by a little while ago. 
You’d never think what happened to him. He’s found a for- 
tune.’ 

‘How do you mean?’ 

‘Well, you know the place on his property where that clump 
of cedars sticks out -you know, right on the coimty road?’ 

‘I know. What about it?’ 

‘Alex went in between those trees and his stone wall. He was 
hunting rabbits. He found a suitcase and a man’s clothes all 
packed nice. Soaked up with rain, though. Looked lil;e it had 
been there some time. And there was a wooden bo.x with a lock, 
and when he broke it open there was near four thousand dollars 
in it. And he found a purse too. There wasn’t anything in it.’ 

‘No name or anything?’ 

‘That’s the strange part -no name; no name on the clothes, 
no labels on the suits. It’s just like the fellow didn’t want to be 
traced.’ 

‘Is Alex going to keep it?’ 

‘He took it in to the sheriff, and the sheriff is going to adver- 
tise it, and if nobody answers, Alex can keep it.’ 

'Somebody’s sure to claim it.’ 

‘I guess so. I didn’t tell Alex that. He’s feeling so good about 
It. That’s funny about no labels — not cut out, just didn’t have 
any.’ 

‘That’s a lot of money,’ Adam said. ‘Somebody’s bound to 
claim it.’ 

‘Alex hung around for a while. You Imow, his wife goes 
around a lot.’ Charles was silent. ‘Adam,’ he said finally, ‘wc got 
to have a talk. The whole county’s doing plenty of talking.’ 

What about?. What do you mean?’ 

‘Goddam it, about that - that girl. Two men can’t have a girl 
living with them. Alex says the women are pretty riled up about 
It. Adam, we can’t have it. Wc live here. We’ve got a good name.’ 

119 



’“You want me to throw her out before she’s well?’ 

‘I want you to get rid of her - ^t her out. I don’t like her.’ 

' ‘You never have.’ . 

‘I know it. I don’t trust . her. There’s something - something - 
I don’t know what it is, biit I don’t like it. When you going to 

get her out?’ ¦ 

‘Tell you .jvhat,’ Adam said slowly. ‘Give her one more week 
and then I’ll do something about her.’, 

‘You promise?’ 

. ‘Sure I promise.’ 

; ‘Well, that’s something. I’ll get the word to Alex’s wife. From 
there on she’ll handle the news. Good Lord, I’ll be glad to have 
the house to ourselves again. I don’t suppose her memory’s come 
back?’ 

' ‘No,’ said Adam. ' 

VI 

Five days later, when Charles had gone to buy some calf feed, 
Adam drove the buggy to the kitchen steps. He helped Cathj’ in, 
tucked the blanket around her knees, and put another around - 
her shoulders. He drove to the county seat and was married to ' 
her by a justice of the peace. 

Charles was home when they returned. He looked sourly at 
them when they came into the kitchen. ‘I thought you’d took her 
in to put her on the train.’ 

‘We got married,’ Adam said simply. 

Cathy smiled at Charles. 

- ‘Why? Why did you do it?’ 

‘Why not? Can’t a man get married?’ 

Cath}’ went quickly into the bedroom and closed the door. 
Charles began to rave. ‘She’s no damned good. I tell von. 
She’s a whore.’ 

‘Charles!’ 

I tell you, she s just a two-bit whore. I wouldn’t trust her 
with a bit piece- why, that bitch, that slut!’ 

Charles, stop it! Stop it, I tell you! Keep your filthy mouth 
shut about my wife ! ’ 

‘She’s no more a wife than an alley cat.’ 

Adam said slowly, ‘I think you’re jealous, Charles. I think you 
wanted to marry her.’ 

‘Why, you goddam fool! Me jealous? I won’t live in the same 
. house with her!’ 


120 



Adam said e\'enly, ‘You won’t have to. I’m going away. You 
can buy me out if you want. You can have the farm. You 
alwaj-s wanted it. You can stay here and rot.’ 

Charles’s voice lowered. ‘Won’t you get rid of her? Please, 
Adam. Throw her out. She’ll tear you to pieces. She’ll destroy 
you, Adam, she’ll destroy you 1 ’ 

‘How do you know so much about her?’ 

Charles’s eyes were bleak. ‘I don’t,’ he said, and his mouth 
snapped shut, 

Adam did not even ask Catliy whether she wanted to come 
out for dinner. He carried two plates into the bedroom and sat 
beside her. 

‘We’re going to go away,’ he said. 

‘Let me go away. Please, let me. I don’t want to make you 
hate your brother. I wonder why he hates me!’ 

‘I think he’s jealous.’ 

Her ej'es narro\ved. ‘Jealous?’ 

‘That’s what it looks like to me. You don’t have to worrj'. 
We’re getting out. We’re going to California.’ 

¦ She said quietly, ‘I don’t want to go to California.’ 

‘Nonsense. Why, it’s nice there, sun all the time and beautiful.’ 
‘I don’t want to go to California.’ 

'You are my wife,’ he said softly. ‘I want you to go with me.’ 
She was silent and did not speak of it again. 

The>- heard Charles slam out the door, and Adam said, ‘That 
will be good for him. He’ll get a little drunk and he’ll feel better.’ 

Cathy modestly looked at her fingers. ‘Adam, I can’t be a wife 
to you until I’m well.’ 

‘I know,’ he said. ‘I understand. I’ll wait.’ 

‘But I want ^-ou to stay with me. I’m afraid of Charles, He 
hates me so,’ 

I’ll bring my cot in here. Then you can call me if you’re 
frightened. You can reach out and touch me.’ 

‘You’re so good,’ she said. ‘Could we have some tea?’ 

‘Why, sure, I’d like some myself.’ He brought the steaming 
cups in and went back for the sugar bo’wl. He settled himself in 
a chair near her bed. ‘It’s pretty strong. Is it too strong for you?’ 
‘I like it strong.’ 

He finished, his cup. ‘Does it taste strange to you? It’s got a 
funny taste.’ 

Her hand flew to her mouth, ‘Oh, let me taste it.’ She sipped 
the dregs. ‘Adam,’ she cried, ‘you got the wrong cup - that v/as 
ttune. It had my medicine in it.’ 


.121 



He licked his Ups. ‘I guess it can’t hurt me.’ 

¦ ‘No, it can’t.’ She laughed softly. ‘I hope I don’t need to call 
you in the night.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Well, you drank my sleeping medicine. Maybe you wouldn’t 
wake up easily.’ 

Adam went down into a heaN^y opium sleep, though he fought 
to Stay awake. ‘Did the doctor tell you to take this much?’ he, 
asked thicldy. ' 

‘You’re just not used to it,’ she said. 

¦ Charles came back at eleven o’clock. Cathy heard his tipsy 
footsteps. He went into his room, flung off his clothes, and got 
into bed. He grunted and turned, trying to get comfortable,' and 
then he opened his eyes. Cathy was standing by his bed. “'What 
do you want?’ 

‘What do you think? Move over a little.’ 

.‘Where’s Adam?’ 

‘He drank my sleeping medicine by mistake. Move over a 
little.” 

He breathed harshly. ‘I already been with a whore.’ 

‘You're a pretty strong boy. Move over a little.’ 

‘How about your broken arm?’ 

‘I’ll take care of that. It’s not your worry.’ 

Suddenly Charles laughed. ‘The poor bastard,’ he said, and 
he thre\v back tlie blanket to receive her. 


122 



Part Two 


CHAPTER 12 

You CAN sec how this book has reached a great boundars ti.at 
was called 1900. Another hundred years were ground up and 
churned, and what had happened was all muddied by the way 
folks wanted it to be -more rich and meaningful the farther 
back it was. In the books of some memories it was the best time 
that ever sloshed over the world — the old time, the gay time, 
sweet and simple, as though time were young and fctirlcss. Old 
men who didn’t know whether they were going to stagger over 
the boundary of the century looked forward to it with distaste. 
For the world was changing, and sweetness was gone, and virtue 
too. Worry had crept on a corroding world, and what war; lost 
-good manners, ease, and beauty? Ladies were not ladies any 
. more, and you couldn’t trust a gentleman’s word. 

There was a time when people kept their fly-buttons fastened. 
And man’s freedom was boiling off. And even childito'vd was not 
good any more - not the way it was. No worry then but how to 
find a good stone, not round c.vactly but flaitcned and water- 
shaped, to use in a sling pouch cut from a discarded shoe. W'hcre 
did all the good stones go, and all simplicity? 

A man’s mind vagued up a little, for how can you remember 
the feeling of pleasure or pain or choking emotion? You can re- 
member only that you had them. An elder man might truly re- 
call tlirough water the delicate doctor-testing of little girls, but 
such a man forgets, and wants to, the acid emotion eating at the 
spleen so that a boy had to put his face flat down it\ the voting 
wild oats and drum his fists against the ground and sob ‘Christ! 
Christ!’ Such a man might say, and did, 'What’s that damned 
kid lying out there in the grass for? He’ll catch a cold.’ 

Oh, strawberries don’t taste as they used to and the thighs of 
women have lost their clutch ! 

And some men eased themselves like setting hens into the nest 
'Of death. 

History was secreted in the glands of a million hi.storians. V’7c 
must get out of this banged-up century, some said, out of this 
cneaung, murderous century of riot and secret death, of 

123 



scrabbling for public lands and damn \vell getting them by any 
mrans at all. 

Th^ back, recall our little nation fringing the oceans, torn 
with complexities, too big for its britches. Just got going when 
the British took us on again. We beat them, but , it didn’t do us 
much good. What we had was a burned White House and ten 
thousand widows on the public pension list. 

Then the soldiers went to Mexico and it was a kind of painful 
picnic. Nobody knows why you go to a picnic to be uncomfort- 
able when it is so easy and pleasant to eat at home. The Mexi- 
can War did uvo good things though. We got a lot of western 
land, damn near doubled our size, and besides that it was a 
training ground for generals, so that when the sad self-murder 
settled on us , the leaders knew the techniques, for making it 
properly horrible. 

And then the arguments ; 

Can you keep a slave? 

Well, if you bought him in good faith, why not? 

Next they’ll be saying a man can’t have a horse. Who is it 
wants to take my property? 

And there we were, like a man scratching at his own face and 
bleeding into his own beard. 

Well, that was over and we got slowly up off the bloody 
ground and started westward. 

There came boom and bust, bankruptcy, depression, 
s. Great public thieves came along and picked the pockets of 
“everyone who had a pocket. 

To hell with that rotten century ! 

T-et’s get it over and the door closed shut on it! Let’s close it 
like a book and go on reading! New chapter, new life. A man 
will have clean hands once we get the lid slammed shut on that 
stinking century. Its a fair thing ahead. There’s no rot bn this 
clean new hundred years. It’s not stacked, and any bastard who 
d^ls seconds from this new deck of years -why, we’ll crucify 
him head-down over a privy. 

Oh, but strawberries will never taste so good again and the 
thighs of women have lost their clutch! 


124 



CHAPTER 1 3 


I 

Sometimes a kind of glory lights up the mind of a man. 
It happens to nearly everyone. You can fed it growing or pre- 
paring like a fuse burning towards dynamite. It is a feeling in 
the stomach, a delight of the nerv'cs, of the forearms. The skin 
tastes the air, and cveiy deep-drawn breath is sweet. Its begin- 
ning has the pleasure of a great stretching yawn; it flashes in the 
brain and the whole world glows outside your eyes. A man may 
have lived all of his life in the grey, and the land and trees of 
him dark and sombre. The events, even the important ones, may 
have trooped by, faceless and pale. And then - the glory — so that 
a cricket song sweetens his cars, the smell of the earth rises 
chanting to his nose, and dappling light under a tree blesses his 
eyes. Then a man pours outward, a torrent of him, and yet he is 
not diminished. And I guess a man’s importance in the world 
can be measured by the quality and number of his glories. It is 
a lonely thing, but it relates us to the world. It is tlie mother 
of all creativeness, and it sets each man separate from all other 
men. 

I don’t know how it will be in tlic years to come. There arc 
monstrous changes taking place in the world, forces shaping a 
future whose face we do not know. Some of these forces seem 
evil to us, perhaps not in themselves but because their tendency 
is to eliminate other things we hold good. It is true that tivo men 
can lift a bigger stone titan one man. A group can build auto- 
mobiles quicker and better than one man, and bread from a huge 
factory is cheaper and more uniform. When our food and cloth- 
ing and housing are all bom in the complication of mass pro- 
duction, mass method is bound to get into our tltinking and to 
eliminate all other thinking. In our time mass or collective pro- 
duction has entered our economics, our politics, and even our 
religion, so that some nations have" substituted the idea collective 
for the idea God. This in my time is the danger. There is great 
tension in the world, tension towards a breaking point, and men 
are unhappy and confused. 

• At such a time it seems natural and good to me to ask myself 
these questions. What do I believe in? What must I fight for and 
what must I fight against? • , * 

Our species is the only creative species, and it has only one 

125 



creative instrument, the individual mind and spirit of a man. 
Nothing was ever created by nvo men. There are no good col- 
laborations, whether in music, in art, in poetrj', in mathematics, 
in philosophy. Once the miracle of creation has taken place, the 
group can build and extend it, but the group never invents any- 
- thing. The preciousness lies in the lonely mind of a man. 

And now the forces marshalled around the concept of the 
group have declared a war of extermination on that precious- 
ness, the mind of man. By disparagement, by starvation, by re- 
pressions, forced direction, and the stunning hammer-blows of 
conditioning, the free, roving mind is being pursued, roped, 
blunted, drugged. It is a sad suicidal course our species seems 
to have taken. 

And this I believe: that the free, exploring mind of the indi- 
' vidual human is the most valuable thing in the world. And this 
I would fight for ; the freedom of the mind to take any direction 
it wishes, undirected. And this I must fight against: any idea, 
religion, or government which limits or destroys the individual. 
This is what I am and what I am about. I can understand why a 
system built on a pattern must try to destroy the free mind, for 
that is one thing which can by inspection destroy such a system. 
Surely I can understand this, and I hate it and I will fight 
against it to preserve the one thing that separates us from the 
uncrcative beasts. If the gloiy can be killed, we are lost. 

It 

Adam Trask grew up in greyness, and the curtains of his life 
were like dusty cobwebs, and his days a slow file of half-sorrows 
and sick dissatisfactions, and then, through Cathy, the glory 
came to him. 

It doesn’t matter that Cathy was what I have called a monster. 
Perhaps we can’t understand Qithy, but on the other hand , we 
are capable of many things in all directions, of great virtues and 
great sins. And who in his mind has not probed the black water? 

Maybe we all have in us a secret pond where evil and ugly 
things germinate and grow strong. But this culture is fenced, 
and the swimming brood climbs up only to fall back. Might ii 
not be that in the dark pools of some men the evil grows' strong 
enough to wriggle over the fence and swim free? Would not 
such a man be our monster, and are we not related to him in our 
hidden water? It would be absurd if we did not understand 
both angels and devils, since we invented them. 

126 


Whatever Catffy may liave been, she set off the glory in Adam. 
His spirit rose flying and released him from fear and bitterness 
and rancid memories. The glory lights up the world and changes 
it the way a star-shell changes a battleground. Perhaps Adam 
did not ^ee Cathy at all, so lighted was she by his eyes. Burned 
in his mind was an image of beauty and tenderness, a sweet and 
holy girl, precious beyond thinking, clean and loving, and that 
image was Cathy to her husband, and nothing Cathy did or said 
could warp Adam’s Cathy. 

She said she did not want to go to California and he did not 
listen, because his Cathy took his arm and started first. So 
bright was his glory that he did not notice tlie sullen pain in his 
brother, did not see the glinting in his brother’s eyes. He sold his 
share of the farm to Charles, for less than it was worth, and with 
that and his half of his father’s money hC’ was free and rich. 

The' brothers were strangers now. They shook hands at the 
station, and Charles watched the train pull out and rubbed his 
scar. He went to the inn, drank four quick whiskies, and climbed 
the stairs to the top floor. He paid the girl and then could not 
perform. He cried in her arms until she put him out. He raged 
at his farm, forced it, added to it, drilled and trimmed, and his 
boundaries extended. He took no rest, no recreation, and he be- 
came rich without pleasure and respected without friends. 

Adam stopped in New York long enough to buy clothes for 
himself and Cathy before they climbed on the train which bore 
them across the continent. How they liappcncd to go to the 
^linas Valley is very easy to understand. 

In that day the railroads - growing, fighting among them- 
selves, striving to increase and to dominate - used every means 
to increase their traffic. The companies not only advertised in 
the newspapers, they issued booklets and broadsides describing 
and picturing the beauty and richness of the West. No claim 
was too extravagant - wealth was unlimited. The Southern Paci- 
fic Railroad, headed by the wild energy of Lcland Stanford, had 
begun to dominate the Pacific Coast not only in transportation 
hut in politics. Its rails extended down the valleys. Netv towns- 
sprang up, new sections were opened and populated, for the 
company had to create customers to get custom. 

The long Salinas Valley was part of the exploitation. Adam 
had seen and studied a fine colour broadside which set forth the 
valley as that region which heaven unsuccessfully imitated. After 
reading the literature, anyone who did not want to settle in the 
oalinas Valley was crazy. 


127 



Adam did not rush at his purcliase. He bought a rig and 
drove around, meeting tlie earlier, comers, tallcing- of soil and 
water, climate and crops, prices and facilities. It was not specu- 
lation with Adam. He was here to settle, to found a home, a 

family, perhaps a dynasty. ’ 

•Adam drove exuberantly from farm to farm, picked up dirt 
and crumbled it in liis fingers, talked and planned and dreamed. 
The people of the valley liked him and were glad he had come 
to live there, for they recognized a man of substance. 

¦ He had only one worry, and that was for Cathy. She was not 
well. She rode around the country with him, but she was listless. 
One morning she complained of feeling ill and staj’ed in her 
room in the King City hotel while Adam drove into the coun- 
try. He returned at about five in tlie afternoon to find her nearly 
dead from loss of blood. Luckily Adam found Dr Tilson at his 
supper and dragged him from his roast beef. The doctor made ¦ 
quick examination, inserted a packing, and turned to Adam. 
‘Why don’t you wait downstairs?’ he suggested. 

Ts she all right?’ 

‘Yes. I’ll call you pretty soon.’ 

Adam parted Cathy’s shoulder, and she smiled up at him. 

Dr Tilson closed the door behind him and came back to the 
>ed. His face was red with anger. “Why did you do it?’ 

Cathy’s mouth was a thin tight line. 

‘Does your husband know you are pregnant ?’ 

Her head moved slowly from side to side. 

‘What did you do it with?’ 

She stared up at him. 

He looked around the room. He stepped to the bureau and 
picked up a knitting-needle. He shook it in her face. ‘The old 
offender -the old criminal,’ he said. ‘You’re a fool. You’ve 
nearly killed yourself and you haven’t lost your baby. I suppose 
you took things too, poisoned \-ourseIf, inserted camphor, kero- 
sene, red pepper. My God! Some of the things you women 
do!’ 

Her eyes were as cold as glass. 

He pulled a chair up beside her bed. 'Why don’t you want to 
havc^ the baby?’ he asked softly. ‘You’ve got a good husband. 
Don t you love him? Don’t you intend to speak to me at all? 
Tell me, damn it! Don’t mrn mulish.’ 

Her lips did.not move and her eyes did not flicker. 

My dear, he said, ‘can’t you see? You must not destroy life. 
That’s tlie one tiring gets me crazj'. God knows I lose patients 

128 



because I don’t know enough. But I trj'-I always And then 
I see a deliberate killing.’ He talked rapidly on. He dreaded the^ 
sick silence between his sentences. This woman puzzled him. 
There was something inhuman about her. ‘Have you met 7 vlrs 
Laurel? She’s wasting and cr5’ing for a bab3'. Everything she has 
or can get she would give to have a baby, and you -you try to 
stab yours with a Imitting-nccdle. All right,’ he cried, ‘j'ou won’t 
speak - you don’t have to. But I’m going to tell j'ou. 'The baby’s 
safe. Your aim was bad. And I’m telling j'ou this - you’re going 
to have that baby. Do y^ou know what the law in this state lias to 
say about abortion? You don’t have to answer, but you listen to 
me! If tlus happens again, if j-ou lose tliis baby and I have any 
reason to suspect monkey business, I will charge you, I will tes- 
tify against j^ou, and I will see j'ou punished. Now I hope j'ou 
have sense enough to believe me, because I mean it.’ 

Cathy moistened her lips with a little pointed tongue. The 
¦ cold went out of her ej'cs and a weak sadness took its place. ‘I’m 
sorry,’ she said. ‘I’m sorry. But you don’t understand.’ 

‘Then why don’t 5'ou tell me?’ His anger disappeared lilce 
mist, ‘Tell me, my dear.’ 

‘It’s hard to tell. Adam is so good, so strong. I am -well, I’m 
tainted. Epilepsy.’ 

‘Not j’ou ! ’ 

‘No, but my grandfather and my father -and my brotlier.’ 
She covered her eyes with her hands. ‘I couldn’t bring tliat to 
my husband.’ 

‘Poor, child,’ he said. ‘My poor child. You can’t be certain. It’s 
more than probable that your baby will be line and healthy. 
Will you promise me not to try any more tricks?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

- ‘All right then. I won’t tell your husband what j'ou did. Now 
lie back and let me see if the bleeding’s stopped. 

In a few minutes he closed his satchel and put the knitting- 
needle in his pocket. ‘I’ll look in tomorrow morning,’ he 
said. 

_ Adam swarmed on him as he came down the narrow stairs 
into the lobb}'. Dr Tilson warded off a flurry of ‘How is she?^s 
she all right? What caused it? Can I go up?’ 

_ “Whoa, hold up - hold up.’ And he used his trick, his standard 
joke. ‘Your wife is sick.’ 

‘Doctor — ’ 

She has the only good sickness there is — ’ 

‘Doctor — ’ 


129 



•Y6ur wife is going to have a baby.’ He brushed past Adam 
and left him staring. ’Three men sitting round the stove grinned, 
at him. One of them obsen'ed dryly, ‘If it was me now -why, 
I’d invite a few, maybe threei friends to have a drink.’ His hint 
was wasted. Adam bolted clumsily up the narrow stairs. 

Adam’s attention narrowed to the Bordoni ranch a few miles 
south of King .City, almost equidistant, in fact, between San 
Lucas and King Cit}'. 

The Bordonis had nine hundred acres left of a grant of ten 
thousand acres which had come to Mrs Bordoni’s great-grand- 
father from the Spanish crown. The Bordonis were Swiss, but 
Mrs Bordoni was the daughter and heiress of a Spanish family 
that had settled in the Salinas Valley in very early times. And as 
happened with most of the old families, the land slipped away. 
•Some was lost in gambling, some. chipped off for taxes, and 
some acres torn off like coupons to buy luxuries -a horse, a 
diamond, or a pretty woman. The nine hundred remaining acres 
were the core of the original Sanchez grant, and the, best of it 
too. They straddled the ri%'er and tucked into the foothills on j- 
both sides, for at tliis point the valley narrows and then opens 
out again. The original Sanchez house was still usable. Built of ' 
adobe, it stood in a tiny opening in the foothills, a miniature 
valley fed by a precious ever-running spring of sweet water. 
That of course was why the first Sanchez had built, his seat 
there. Huge live oaks shaded the valley, and the earth had a, 

. richness and a greenness foreign to this part of the country. The 
1 walls of the low house were four feet thick, and the round pole 
rafters were tied on with rawhide ropes which had been put on 
wet. The hide shrank and pulled joist and rafter tight together, 
and the leather ropes became hard as iron and nearly imperish- 
able. There is only one drawback to this building method. Rats 
- will gnaw at the hide if they are let. 

The old house seemed to have grown out of the earth, and it 
Vins lovely. Bordoni used it for a cow barn. He was a Swiss, an 
immigrant, with his national passion for cleanliness. ¦ He dis- 
trusted the thick mud wails and built a frame house some dis- 
tance away, and his cows put their heads out of the deep 
recessed windows of the old Sanchez house. 

The Bordonis were childless, and when the wife died in ripe 
^nrs a lonely longing for his Alpine past fell on her husband. 
He wanted to sell the ranch and go home. Adam Trask refused 
^ hurrj-, and Bordoni was asking a big price and using 
the selling method of pretending not to care whether he sold or 

130 



not. Bordoni knew Adam was going to buy his land long before 
Adam knew it. 

Where Adam settled he intended to stay and to have his un- 
born children stay. He was afraid he might buy one place and 
then see another he liked better, and all the time the Sanchez 
- place was drawing him. With tlie advent of Cathy, his life at- 
tended long and pleasantly ahead of liim. But he went through 
all the motions of carefulness. He drove and rode and walked 
over every foot of the land. He put a post-hole auger down 
through the subsoil to test and feel and smell the under earth. 
He inquired about the small wild plants of field and riverside 
and hill. In damp places he knelt dow-n and e-xamined the game 
~ tracks in tlte mud, mountain lion and deer, coyote and wild cat, 
skunk and racoon, weasel and rabbit, all overlaid with the pat- 
tern of quail trades. He threaded among willows and sycamores 
and wild blackberry vines in the river-bed, patted the trunks of 
live oaks and scrub oak, madrono, laurel, tO 3 ' 0 n. 

Bordoni watched him with squinting eyes and poured 
tumblers of red wine squeezed from the grapes of his small hill- 
_ side vineyard. It was Bordoni’s pleasure to get a little drunk 
every afternoon. And Adam, who had never tasted wine, began 
to like it. 

. Over and over he asked Cathy’s opinion of the place. Did she 
lilte it?. Would she be happy there? And he didn’t listen to her 
noncommittal answers. He thought that she linked arms with 
his enthusiasm. In the lobby of the King City hotel he talked to 
the men who gathered around the stove and read the papers sent 
down from San Francisco. 

‘It’s water I think about,’ he said one evening. ‘I wonder how 
deep you’d have to go to bring in a well.’ 

A rancher crossed his denim knees. ‘You ought to go see Sam 
Hamilton,’ he said. ‘He knows more about water titan anybody 
, . around here. He’s a water witch and a well-digger too. He’ll tell 
you. He’s put down half the wells in tliis part of the valley.’ 

His companion chuckled. ‘Sam’s got a real legitimate reason 
to be interested in water. Hasn’t got a goddam drop of it on his 
- own place.’ 


^ him?’ Adam asked. 

1 11 tell you what. I’m going to have him make some angle- 
irons. ru take 3 'ou with me if you want. You’ll like Mr Hamil- 
ton. He’s a fine man.’ 

Kind of comical genius,’ his companion said. 


131 



in 


They went to the Hamilton ranch in Louis Lippo’s buckboard - 
Louis and Adam Trask. The iron straps rattled around in the 
box, and a leg of venison, wrapped in wet burlap to keep it cool, 
jumped around on top of the iron. It was customary in that day , 
to take some substantial lump of food as a present when you 
went calling on a man, for you had to stay to dinner unless j'ou 
wished to insult his house. But a few guests could set back -the 
feeding plans for the week if you did not build up what 3'ou 
dcstroyedl A quarter of pork or a rump of beef would do. Louis 
had cut down the venison and Adam provided a bottle of 
whisky. 

‘Now, I’ll have to tell j’ou,’ Louis said. ‘Mr Hamilton will like 
that, but Mrs Hamilton has got a skunner on it. If I was you I’d - 
leave it under the seat, and when we drive around to the shop, 
why, then j'ou can get it out. That’s what we always do.’ 

‘Doesn’t she let her husband take a drink?’ \ 

‘No bigger than a bird,’ said Louis. ‘But she’s got brass-bound 
opinions. Just you leave the botde under the seat.’ 

They left the valley road and drove into the worn and rutted >¦ 
hills over a set of wheel tracks gullied by the winter rains. The 
horses strained into their collars and- the buckboard rocked and 
stvaj-ed. The year had not been kind to the hills, and already in 
June they were drj' and the stones showed through the short, 
’.burned feed. The wild oats had headed out barely six inches 
above the ground, as though with knowledge that if they didn’t 
make seed quickly they wouldn’t get to seed at all. 

‘It’s not likely-looking country',’ Adam said. 

‘Likely? Why, Mr Trask, it’s country that will break a man’s 
heart and eat him up. Likely' ! Mr Hamilton has a sizeable piece 
and he’d of stan'ed to death on it with all those children. The 
ranch don’t feed them. He does all kinds of jobs, and his boys 
are starting to bring in something now. It’s a fine family.’ 

Adam stared at a line of dark mesquite that peeked out of a 
draw. ‘Why in the world would he settle on a place like this?’ 

Louis Lippo, as does every man, loved to interpret, to a stran- 
ger parttcularly', if no native was present to put up an argument. 

1 11 tell you, he said. Take me— my father was Italian. Came 
here after the trouble but he brought a little money, Aly' place 
isn’t very big but it’s nice. By father bought it. He picked it out. 
And take you -I don’t know how you’re fixed and wouldn’t 
ask, but they say you’re trying to buy the old Sanchez place and 

132 



Bordoni never gave anything away. You’re pretty well fixed or 
you wouldn’t even ask about it.’ 

‘I’m comfortably off,’ said Adam modestly. 

‘I’m talking the long way round,’ said Louis. ‘When Mr and 
Mrs Hamilton came into the valley they didn’t liavc a pot to piss 
in. They had to take what was left -government land that no- 
body else \vanted. Twcnt\--five acres of it won’t keep a cow alive 
e\'en in good years, and they say the coyotes move away in bad 
years. There’s people .say tlicy don’t know how the Hamiltons 
lived. But of course Mr Hamilton went right to work- that’s 
how tlicy lived. Worked as a hired hand till he got his threshing 
machine built.’ 

‘Must have made a go of it. I hear of him all over.’ 

‘He made a go of it all right. Raised nine children. I’ll bet he 
hasn’t got four bits laid away. How could he?’ 

One side of the buckboard leaped up, rolled over a big round 
stone and dropped down again. The horses were dark with 
sweat and lathered under collar and britching. 

‘I’ll be glad to talk to him,’ said Adam. 

‘Well, sir, he raised one fine crop - he had good children and 
he raised them fine. All doing well -maybe except Joe. Joc-he’.s 
the youngest - the}'’re talking about sending him to college, but 
all ihe^ rest are doing fine. Mr Hamilton can be proud. The 
house is just on the other side of the next rise. Don’t forget and 
bring out that whisky- she’ll freeze you to the ground.’ 

The dry earth was licking under the sun and the crickets 
rasped. ‘It’s a real god-forsaken country,’ said Louis. 

‘Makes me feel mean,’ said Adam. 

‘How’s that?’ 


I’m fixed so I don’t have to live on a place lilcc this.’ 
Me too, and I don’t feel mean. I’m just goddam glad.’ 

When the buckboard topped the rise Adam could look down 
on the little cluster of buildings which composed the Hamilton 
seat -a house with many lean-tos, a cow shed, a shop, and a 
wagon shed. It was a dry and sun-caten sight — no big trees and 
2 small hand-watered garden. 

^uis turned to Adam, and there was just a hint of hostility 
JO IS tone. ‘I want to put you straight on one or two things, Mr 
rask. There’s people that when they sec Samuel Hamilton the 
tot tune might get the idea he’s full of bull. He don’t talk like 
? ® people. He’s an Irishman. And he’s all full of plans — a 
oundred plans a day. And he’s all full of hope. My Christ, he’d 
ve to be to live on this land! But you remember this— he s a 


133 



fine worker, a good blacksmith, and some of his plans work out. 
And I’ve heard him-.taik about things that were going to happen, 
and they did.’ 

Adam was alarmed at the hint of threat. ‘I’m not a man to 
run another man down,’ he said, and he felt that suddenly Louis 
thought of Lim as a stranger and an enemy. 

‘I just wanted you to get it straight. There’s some people come 
in from the East and they think if a man hasn’t got a lot of 
money he’s no good.’ 

‘I wouldn’t think of — ’ 

‘Mr Hamilton maybe hasn’t got four bits put away, but he’s 
our people and he’s as good as we got. And he’s raised the nicest 
family you’re likely to see. I just want you to remember that.’ 

Adam was on Ac point of defending himself, and then he 
said, ‘I’ll remember. Thanks for telling me.’ 

Louis faced round front again. ‘There he is -see, out by the 
shop? He must of heard us.’ 

•Has he got a beard ? ’ Adam asked, peering. 

‘Yes, got a nice beard. It’s turning white fast, beginning to 
grizzle up.’ 

They drove past the frame house and saw Mrs Hamilton 
looking out of the window at them, and they drew up in front 
of the shop where Samuel stood waiting for them. 

Adam saw a big man, bearded like a patriarch, his gre3’ing 
hair stirring in the air like thistledown. His checl<s above his 
beard were pink where the sun had burned his Irish skin. He 
; wore a clean blue shirt, overalls, and a leather apron. His sleeves 
were rolled up, and his muscular arms were clean too. Only liis 
hands were blackened from the forge. After a quick glance Adam 
came back to the eyes, light blue and filled with a young de- 
light. The wrinkles around tliem were drawn in radial lines in- 
wards by laughter. 

‘Louis,’ he said, Tm glad to sec you. Even in the sweetness of 
• our little heaven here, we like to see our friends,’ He smiled at 
Adam, and Louis said, ‘I brought Mr Adam Trask to sec you. 
He’s a stranger from down cast, come to settle.’ 

‘I’m glad,’ said Samuel. ‘Wc’Il shake another time. I wouldn’t 
soil your hand with these forge hooks.’ 

‘I brought some strap iron, Mr Hamilton. Would you make 
some angles for me? The whole frame of my header bed is 
fallen to hell.’ 

Sure I will, Louis. Get down, get down. We’ll put the horses 
to the shade.’ 


134 



‘There’s a piece of venison behind, and Mr Trask brought a 
little something.’ 

Samuel glanced towards the house. ‘Maybe we’ll get out the 
“little something” when we’ve got the rig behind tlie shed.’ 

Adam could hear the singing lilt of liis speech and yet could 
detect no word pronounced in a strange manner except perhaps 
in sharpened fs and I's held high on the tongue. 

Xouis, will 3’ou out-span j-our team? I’ll take the venison in. 
Liza will be glad. She likes a venison stew.’ 

‘Any of the young ones home?’ 

‘Well, no, they aren’t. George and Will came home for the 
week-end, and they all went last night to a dance up Wild 
Horse Canyon at the Peach Tree school-house. They’ll come 
trooping back by dusk. We lack a sofa because of that. I’ll tell 
you later -Liza will have a vengeance on them -it was Tom 
did it. I’ll tell you later.' He laughed and started towards the 
house, carr3'ing the wrapped deer’s haunch. ‘If j'ou want you 
can bring the “little something” into the shop, so j’ou don’t let 
the sun glint on it.’ 

They heard him calling as he came near tlie house. ‘Liza, 
3’ou’ll ne\'er guess. Louis Lippo has brought a piece of venison 
bigger than you.’ 

Louis drove in behind the shed, and Adam helped him take 
the horses out, tie up tlie tugs, and halter them in the shade. ‘He 
meant that about the sun shining on the bottle,’ said Louis. 
‘She must be a holy terror.’ 

‘No bigger than a bird, but she’s brass-bound.’ 

‘ “Out-span,” ’ Adam said, ‘I tliink I’ve heard it said that way, 
or read it.’ 

^ Samuel rejoined them in the shop. ‘Liza will be happy if you 
will stay to dinner,’ he said. 

‘She didn't expect us,’ Adam protested. , 

‘Hushj man. She’ll make some extra dumplings for the stew. 
It s a pleasure to have j’ou here. Give me j'our straps, Louis, and 
let’s see how j'ou want them.’ 

He built a chip fire in the black square of the forge and pulled 
a bellows breeze on it and then fed wet coke over with his fin- 
gers until it glowed. ‘Here, Louis,’ he said, ‘wave your wing on 
®y fire. Slow, man, slow and e\'cn.’ He laid the strips of iron on 
¦ the glowing coke. ‘No, sir, Mr Trask, Liza’s used to cooking for 
nme starving children. Nothing can startle her.’ He tonged the 
iron to more advantageous heat, and he Mughed. ‘I’ll take that 
ast back as a holy lie,’ he said. ‘Aly wife is rumbling like round 

135 ‘ 



stones in the surf. And I’ll caution the both of you not to men- 
tion the word “sofa”. It’s a word of anger and sorrow to Liza.’ 

‘You said something about it,’ Adam said. 

‘If you knew my boy Tom, you’d understand it better. Air 
Trask. Louis knows him.’ , 

'-‘Sure I know him,’ Louis said. 

Samuel went on, ‘My Tom is a hell-bent boy. Always takes, 

• more on his plate than he can eat. Always plants more titan he 

• can harvest. Pleasures too much, sorrows too much. Some people 
are like that. Liza thinks I’m like that. I don’t know what will 
come of Tom. Maybe greamess, maj’be the noose -well, Hamil- 
tons have been hanged before. And I’ll tell j'ou about that some 
time.’ 

‘The sofa,’ Adam suggested politely. 

‘You’re right. I do, and Liza says I do, shepherd my words . 
like rebellious sheep. Well, came the dance at the Peach Trw 
school and the boys, George, Tom, WiU, and Joe, all decided to 
go. And of course the girls were asked. George and-WDl and Joe, 
poor simple boys, each asked one lady friend, but Tom - he took 
¦ too big a helping as usual. He asked two Williams sisters, Jennie 
and Belle. How many screw-holes do you want, Louis?’ ¦ 

‘Five,’ said Louis. 

‘All right. Now I must tell you, Air Trask, that my Tom has 
, all the egotism and self-love of a boy who thinks he’s ugly. 
Mostly lets himself go fallow, but comes a celebration and he 
garlands himself like a maypole, and he glories like spring 
K flowers. This takes him quite a piece of time. You notice the 
wagon house was empty? George and Will and Joe started early 
and not so beautiful as Tom. George took tlie rig. Will had the 
buggi’, and Joe got the little two-wheeled cart.’ Samuel’s eyes 
shone with pleasure. ‘Well then, Tom came out as shy and shin- 
ing as a Roman emperor and the only thing left with wheels was 
a haj'-rake, and you can’t take even one Williams sister on that. 
For good or bad,' Liza was taktng her nap. Tom sat on the steps 
and thought it out. Then I saw him go to the shed and hitch up 
two horses and take the double-tree off the hay-rake. He wrestled 
the sofa out of the house and ran a fifth-chain under the legs — 
the fine goose-neck horsehair sofa that Liza loves better than 
anything. I gave it to her to rest on before George was born. , 
The last I saw, Tom went dragging up the hill, reclining at Ills 
ease on the sofa to get the Williams girls. And, oh. Lord, it’ll 
be worn thin as a wafer from scraping by the time he gets it 
back. Samuel put down his tongs and placed his hands on his 

136 




'There’s a four-hundred-acre piece beside the river. Would 

there be water under it?’. . _ „ 

‘I’d have to look. It seems to me it’s an odd valley. It you U 
hold your patience close, maybe I can tell you a little bit about 
it, for I’ve looked at it and poked my stinger down into .it. A 
hungry man gorges with his mind -he does indeed.’ 

Louis Lippo said, ‘Mr Trask is from New i^gland. He plans 
to settle here. He’s been west before, though - in the army, fight- 
ing Indians'. ^ 

‘Were you now? Then it’s you should talk and let me learn. 

‘I don’t want to talk about it’ 

‘Why not? God help my family and my neighbours if I had 
fought the Indians ! ’ 

‘I didn’t want to fight them, sir.’ The ‘sir’ crept in without his 
knowing it. . 

‘Yes, I can understand that. It must be a hard thing to kill a 
man you don’t know and don’t hate.’ 

‘Maybe that makes it easier,’ said Louis. 

‘You have a point, Louis. But some men are friends with the 
whole world in their hearts, and there arc otliers that hate them- 
sdves and spread their hatred around like butter on hot bread.’ 

‘I’d rather you told me about this land,’ Adam said uneasily, 
for a sick picture of piled-up bodies came into his mind. 

‘What time is it?’ 

Louis steppM out and looked at the sun. ‘Not past ten o’clock.’ 
‘If I get started I have no self-control. My son Will says I talk 
to trees when I can’t find a human vegetable.’ He sighed and sat 
down on a nail-keg. ‘I said it was a strange valley, but maybe 
that’s because I was bom in a green place. Do you find it 
' strange, Louis?’ 

¦No, I never been out of it.’ 

‘I’ve dug in it plenty,’ Samuel said. ‘Something went on under 
it - maybe still going on. There’s an ocean bed underneath, and 
below that another world. But that needn’t bother a farming 
man. Now, on top is good soil, particularly on the flats. In the 
upper valley it is light and sandy, but mixed in with that, .the 
top sweetness of the hills tltat washed down on it in the winters. 
As you go north the valley widens out, and the soil gets blacker 
and heavier and perhaps richer. It’s my belief that marshes were 
there once, and the roots of centuries rotted into the soil and 
made it black and fertilized it. And when you turn it up, a little 
greasy clay mbccs and holds it together. That’s from about 
Gonzales north to the river mouth. Off the sides, around Salinas 

138 



and Blanco and Castrovillc and Moss Landing, the marshes are 
still there. And when one day those marshes are drained off, 
that will be tlie richest of all land in this red world.’ 

‘He always tells what it will be like some day,’ Louis threw in. 

' ‘Well, a man’s mind can’t stay in time the way his body 
does.’ 

‘If I’m going to settle here I need to know about how and 
what will be,’ said Adam. ‘My children, when I have them, will 
be on it.’ 

Samuel’s eyes looked over tlie heads of his friends, out of the 
dark forge to the yellow sunlight. ‘You’ll have to know that 
under a good part of the valley, some places deep, and others 
pretty near the surface, there’s a laj^er called hard-pan. It’s a 
cla}^, hard-packed, and it feels greas}' too. Some places it is only 
a foot thick, and more in otlicrs. And this hard-pan resists 
water. If it were not there the winter rains would go soaking 
down and dampen the earth, and in the summer it would rise 
up to the roots again. But when the cartli above the hard-pan is 
soaked full, the rest runs fresheting off or stands rotring on top. 
And that’s one of the main curses of our valley.’ 

‘Well, it’s a pretty good place to live in, isn’t it?’ 

‘Yes, it is, but a man can’t entirely rest when he knows it 
could be richer. I’ve thought that if you could drive thousands 
of holes through it to let the water in, it might solve it. And 
then I tried something with a few sticks of dynamite. I punched 
a hole through the hard-pan and blasted. That broke it up and 
the water could get down. But, God in heaven, think of the 
amount of dynamite! I’ve read that a Swede - tlie same man 
who invented dynamite -has got a new e-XToIosive stronger and 
!>afer. Maybe that might be the answer.’ 

Louis said half derisively and half with admiration, ‘He’s 
always thinking about how to change things. He’s never satisfied 
with the way they are.’ 

Samuel smiled at him. ‘They say man lived in trees one time. 
Somebody had to get dissatisfied with a high climb or your feet 
Would not be touching flat ground now.’ And then he laughed 
3gam. ‘I can see myself sitting on my dust heap making a world 
® iny mind as surely as God created this one. But God saw his 
'TOrld. I’ll never see mine except— this way. This will be a val- 
ty of great richness one day. It could feed the world, and maybe 

Will. And happy people will live here, thousands and thou- 
^nds A cloud seemed to come over his eyes and bis face set 
>n sadness and he was silent. 


139 



‘You malie it sound lilte a good place to settle/ Adam said. 
‘Where else could I raise my children v/ith that coming?’ 

Samuel went on, ‘There’s a thing I don’t understand. There’s a 
blackness on this valley. I don’t Imow what it is, but I can feel it. 
Sometimes on a white blinding day I can feel it cutting off the 
sun and squeezing the light out of it like a sponge.’ His voice 
rose. ‘There’s a black violence on this valley, I don’t laiow-I 
don’t know. It’s as though some old ghost haunted it out of the 
dead ocean below and troubled the air with unhappiness. It’s as 
secret as hidden sorrow. I don’t know what it is, but I see it and 
feel it in the people here.’ 

Adam shivered. ‘I just remembered I promised to get back 
early. Cathy, my wife, is going to have a bab}’,’ 

‘But Liza’s getting ready.’ , , 

‘She’ll understand when you tell her about the baby. My ¦wife 
is feeling poorly. And I thank you for telling me about the 
water.’. , 

‘Have I depressed you %vith my rambling?’ 

‘No, not at all -not at all. It’s Cathy’s first baby and she’s 
miserable.’ 

Adam struggled all night with his thoughts, and the next day 
he drove out and shook hands with Bordoni and the, Sanchez 
place was his. 


CHAPTER 14 

I 

There is so much to tell about the Western country in that 
da}’ that it is hard to Imow where to start. One thing sets off 
a hundred others. The problem is to decide tvliich one to tell 
first, 

"i ou remember that Samuel Hamilton said his children had 
gone to a dance at the Peach Tree school. The country schools 
Ur ere the centres of culture then. The Protestant churches in the 
towns were fighting for their existence in a country where they 
.were newco.mcrs. The Catholic church, first on the scene and- 
deeply dug in, sat in comfortable tradition while the missions 
uerc gradually abandoned and their roofs fell in and pigeons 
roosted on the stripped altars. The library (in Latin and Span- 
ish) of the San Antonio Mission was throtvn into a granary, 

140 



where the rats ate off the sheepskin bindings. In the country the 
repository of art and science was the school, and tlic school- 
teacher shielded and carried the torch of learning and of beauty. 
The school-house was the meeting place for music, for debate. 
The polls were set in the school-house for elections. Social life, 
whether it was the crowning of a May queen, the eulogy to a 
dead president, or an all-night dance, could be held nowhere 
else. And the teacher was not only an intellectual paragon and 
a social leader, but also the matrimonial catch of the countryside. 
A family could indeed walk proudly if a son married the school- 
teacher, Her children were presumed to have intellectual ad- 
vantages both inherited and conditioned. 

The daughters of Samuel Hamilton were not destined to be- 
come work-destroyed farm wives. They were handsome girls 
and they carried with them the glow of their descent from the 
kings of Ireland. They had a pride tltat transcended their pov- 
erty. No one ever thought of them as descr\'ing pity. Samuel 
raised a distinctly superior breed. They were better read and 
better bred than most of their contemporaries. To all of them 
Samuel communicated his love of learning, and he set them 
apart from the prideful ignorance of their time. Olive Hamilton 
became a teacher. That meant she left home at fifteen and went 
to live in Salinas, where she could go to sccondarj' school. At 
seventeen she took county board c.vaminations, which covered 
all the arts and sciences, and at eighteen she was teaching school 
at Peach Tree. 

In her school tlicre were pupils older and bigger than she was. 
It required great tact to be a school-teacher. To keep order 
among the big undisciplined boys without pistol and bull whip 
was a difficult and dangerous business. In one school in the 
mountains a teacher was raped by her pupils. 

Olive Hamilton had not only to teach cvcrjihing, but to all 
ages. Very few youths went past the eighth grade in those days, 
and what with farm duties some of them took fourteen or fifteen 
years to do it. Olive had also to practise a rudimentarj' medicine, 
were constant accidents. She sewed up knife cuts after 
a fight in the school-j’ard. When a small barefooted boj’ was bit- 
ten by a rattlesnake, it was her duty to suck his toe to draw the 
poison out. 

She taught reading to the first grade and algebra to the 
iptth. She led the singing, acted as a critic of literature, wrote 
me social notes that went weekly to the Salims Journal In ad- 
I ion, the whole social life of the area was in her hands, not 

1,41 



only graduation exercise, but dances, theetings, debates,' chorals, 
Christmas and May Day festivals, patriotic exudations on De- 
coration Day and the Fourth of July. She was on the election 
board and headed and held together all charities. It was far 
from an easy job, and it had duties and obligations beyond be- 
lief. The teacher had no private life. She was watched jealously 
for any weakness of character. She could not board with one 
family for more -than one term, for that would cause j^ousy- 
a family gained social ascendancy by boarding the teacher, If a 
marriageable son belonged to the family where she boarded a 
proposal was automatic; if there was more than one claimant, 
vicious fights occurred over her hand. The Aguita boys, tluree of 
them, nearly clawed each other to death over Olive Hamilton., 
Teachers rarely lasted very long in the country schools. The 
work was so hard and the proposals so constant that they mar- 
ried within a very short time. 

This was a course Olwe Hamilton determined she %vould not 
take. She did not share the intellectual enthusiasm's of her 
fatlier, but the time she had spent in Salinas determined her not 
to be a ranch wife. She wanted to live in a town, perhaps not so, 
big as Salinas, but at least not a cross-roads. In Salinas, Olive 
had experienced niceties of living, the choir and vestments. 
Altar Guild, and bean suppers of the Episcopal church. She had 
partaken of the arts - road companies of plays and even operas, 
with their magic and promise of an aromatic world outside. She 
had gone to parties, played charades, competed in poetry read- 
ings, joined a chorus and orchestra. Salinas had tempted her.- 
; There she could go to a party dressed for the party, and come 
home in the same dress, instead of rolling her clothes in a 
saddlebag and riding ten miles, then unrolling and pressing 
them. 

Bus 3' though she was witli her teaching, Olive longed for the 
metropolitan life, and when the young man who had built the 
flour mill in King City sued properly for her hand, she accepted 
Iiim subject to a long and secret engagement. The secrecj' was 
required because if it were known there would be trouble among 
the yoimg men in the neighbourhood. 

Olive had not her father’s brilliance, but she did have a sense 
of fun, together with her mother’s strong and undeviating will. 
What light and beauty could be forced down the throats of her 
reluctant pupils, she forced. 

There was a wall against learning. A man wanted his children 
to read, to figure, and that was enough. More might make them 

142 



dissatisfied and flighty. And there were plenty of examples to 
prove that learning made a boy leave the farm to live in the city 
-to consider himself better than his father. Enough arithmetic 
to measure land and lumber and to keep accounts, enough writ- 
ing to order goods and write to relatives, enough reading for 
newspapers, almanacs and farm journals, enough music for re- 
ligious and patriotic display - that was enough to help a boy and 
not to lead him astray. Learning was for doctors, law>’ers, and 
teachers, a class set off and not considered related to other 
people. There were some sports, of course, like Samuel Hamil- 
. ton, and he was tolerated and liked, but if he had not been able 
to dig a well, shoe a horse, or run a tlircshing machine, God 
knows what would have been thought of tlie family. 

Olive did marry her young man and did move, first to Paso 
Robles, then to ICing City, and finally to Salinas. She was as 
intuitive as a cat. Her acts were based on feelings rather than 
thoughts. She liad her motlier’s firm chin and button nose and 
her father’s fine eyes. She was the most definite of any of the 
Hamiltons except her mother. Her theologj' was a curious mix- 
ture of Irish fairies and an Old Testament Jehovah whom in her 
later life she confused with her father. Heaven was to her a nice 
home ranch inhabited by her dead relatives. External realities of 
a frustrating nature she obliterated by refusing to believe in 
them, and when one resisted her disbelief she raged at it. It was 
told of her that she cried bitterly because she could not go to 
two dances on one Saturday night. One was, in Greenfield and 
the other in San Lucas - twenty miles apart. To have gone to 
both and then home would have entailed a sLxty-milc horseback 
ride. This was a fact she could not blast with her disbelief, and 
so she cried with ve.\ation and went to neither dance. 

As she grew older she developed a scattergun method for deal- 
ing \rith unpleasant facts. When I, her only son, was sixteen I 
contracted pleural pneiunonia, in that day a killing disease. I 
went down and down, until the wing-tips of the angels brushed 
tny eyes. Olive used her scattergun method of treating pleural 
pneumonia, and it worked. The Episcopalian minister prayed 
with and for me, tlie Mother Superior and nuns of the convent 
next to our house held me up to Heaven for relief twice a day, a 
distant relative who was a Christian Science reader held the 
thought for me. Every incantation, magic, and herbal formula 
known was brought out, and she got two good nurses and the 
.town’s best doctors. Her metliod was practical. I got well. She 
was loving and firm with her family, three girls and me, trained 

143 



US to housework, dish-washing, dothes-washing, and manners. 
When angered she had a terrible eye which could blanch Ae 
skin off a bad child as easily as if he were a boiled almond; 

When I recovCTed from my pneumorua it came time for me to 
learn to walk again. I had been nine weeks in bed, and the, 
muscles had gone lax and the laziness of recoverj' had set in. 
When I was helped up, every nerve cried, and the wound in my 
side, which had been opened to drain the pus from the pleural 
cavity, pained horribly. I fell back in bed, cr 5 dng, ‘I can’t do 
it! I can’t get up!’ 

Olive fixed me with her terrible eye. ‘Get up ! ’ she said. ‘Your 
father has worked all day and sat up all night. He has gone into 
debt for you. Now get up I ’ 

And I got up. 

Debt was an ugly word and an uglif concept to Olive. A bill 
unpaid past the fifteenth of the month was a debt. The word had 
connotations of dirt and slovenliness and dishonour. Olive, who 
Uruly believed that her family was the best in the world, quite 
snobbishly would not permit it to be touched by debt. She 
planted that terror of debt so deeply in her children that even 
now, in a changed economic pattern where indebt^ness is a 
part of living, I become restless when a bill is two days overdue. 
Olive never accepted the instalment plan when it became popu- 
lar. A thing bought by instalments was a thing you did not own 
and for which you were in debt. She saved for things she 
wanted, and tills meant that the neighbours had new gadgets as 
much as nvo years before we did. 


X X 

01i\ ^ had ^eat courage. Perhaps it takes courage to raise child 
ren. /^d I must tell you what she did about the First Work 
\\ ar. Her thinking was not internationaL Her first boundary wa; 

c oMgraphy of her family, second her town, Salinas, and fin 
nn,^ not clearly defined, which was thi 

whnn believe in the v/ar, not evei 

roop , our militia cav'alry, was called out, loaded it: 
horses on a tram, and set out for the open world. 

from, us. He tvas wide 
was almnst ttf 1 'nnnth was wide, and he had red eyes. Hi 
him was rn ^^^nas. To say good morning t( 

to Troon ^ im Itch with self-consciousness. He belongec 
to Troop C because the armoury had a basket-ball court. 

144 



If the Germans had known Olive and had been sensible they 
ould have gone out of their %vay not to anger her. But they 
idn’t know or they were stupid. When they killed Martin 
[opps they lost the war, because that made my mother mad and 
le took out after them. She had liked Martin Hopps. He had 
ever hurt anyone. When they killed him Olive declared war on 
le German Empire, 

She cast about for a weapon. Knitting helmets and socks was 
at deadly enough for her. For a time she put on a Red Cross 
ruform and met other ladies similarly dressed in the armoury, 
here bandages were rolled and reputations unrolled. This was 
1 right, but it was not driving at the heart of the Kaiser. Olive 
anted blood for the life of Martin Hopps. She found her wea- 
3n in Liberty bonds. She had never sold anything in her life 
eyond an occasional angel cake for the Altar Guild in the base- 
lent of the Episcopal church, but she began to sell bonds by the 
lie. She brought ferocity to her work. I think she made people 
[raid not to buy them. And when they did buy from Olive she 
ave them a sense of actual combat, of putting a bayonet in the 
oniach of Germany. 


As her sales sky-rocketed and stayed up, the Treasury Depart- 
lent began to notice this new Amazon. First there came mimeo- 
raphed letters of commendation, then real letters signed by the 
ecretaiy of the Trcasurj', and not with a rubber stamp either. 
7e were proud, but not so proud as when prizes began to arrive, 
a German helmet (too small for any of us to wear), a bayonet, a 
jagged piece of shrapnel set on an ebony base. Since we were not 
eligible for armed conflict beyond marching with wooden guns, 


our mother’s war seemed to justify us. And then she outdid her- 
self and outdid evcrj'one in our part of the country. She 
quadrupled her already fabulous record and she was awarded 
the fairest prize of all - a ride in an army aeroplane. 

Oh, we were proud kids! Even vicariously this was an emi-, 
nence we could hardly stand. But my poor mother -I must tel 
you that there are certain things in the existrace of wine my 
mother did not believe, against any possible evidence to- e con 
trary. One was a bad Hamilton and another was the aeropLne. 
The fact that she had seen them didn't make her e Jeve m 


""in^hTlSiit of what she did I have wied to imagme tow she 
felt. Her soul must have crawled thr"' ' ' 

fly in something that does not exist. ^ f ^ 

would have been cruel and unusual, but it was 


145 


honour, and an eminence. She must have looked into our eyes 
and seen the shining idolatry there and understood that she was 
trapped. Not to have gone would have let her family down. She 
was surrounded, and there was no honourable way out save 
death. Once she had decided to go up in the non-existent thing 
she seemed to have had no idea whatever that she would survive 
it. ¦ / 

Olive made her will -took lots of time with it and had it 
checked to be sure it was legal. Then she opened her rosewood 
box wherein were the letters her husband had written to her in 
courtship and since. We had not known he wrote poetry to her, 
but he had. She built a fire in the grate and burned every letter. , 
They were hers, and she wanted no other human to see them. 
She bought all new underwear. She had a horror of being found 
dead witli mended or, worse, unmended underclothes. I think 
perhaps she saw the wide twisted moutli and embarrassed eyes of , 
Martin Hopps on her and felt that in some way she was re- 
imbursing him for his stolen life. She was very' gentle with us ' 
and did not notice a badly washed dinner-plate that left a ¦ 
greasy stain on the dish-towel. 

-This glory was scheduled to take place at the Salinas Race 
Track and Rodeo Grounds. We were driven to the track in an' 

. army automobile, feeling more solemn and golden than at a , 
good funeral. Our father was working at the Spreckles Sugar , 
Factory, five miles from town, and could not get off, or perhaps , 
didn’t want to, for fear he co^d not stand the strain. But Olive 
; had made arrangements, on pain of not going up, for the plane 
to try to fly as far as the sugar factory before it crashed. 

I realize now that the several hundred people who had 
gathered simply came to see the aeroplane, but at that time.tve 
thought they were there to do my mother honour. Olive was not 
a tall woman and at that age she had begun to put on weight. 
We had to help her out of the car. She was probabh' stiff with 
fright, but her little chin was set. 

The plane stood in the field around which the race track \ras 
laid out. It was appallingly little, and flimsy - an open-cockpit 
biplane with wooden struts, tied with piano wire. The wings 
were covered with canvas. Olive was stunned. She went to the 
side as an ox to the knife. Over the clothes she was convinced 
were her burial clothes two sergeants slipped on a coat, a padded 
coat, and a flight coat, and she grew rounder and rounder with 
. «ch layw. Then a leather helmet and goggles, and with her little . 
button of a nose and her pink cheeks you really had something. 

146 



She looked like a goggled ball. The tvvo sergeants hoisted her 
bodily into the cockpit and wedged her in. She filled the open- 
ing completely. As tliey strapped her in she suddenly came to 
life and began waving frantically for attention. One of the sol- 
diers 'climbed up, listened to her, came over to my sister Mary, 
and led her to the side of the plane, Olive was tugging at the 
thick padded flight glove on her left hand. She got her hands 
free, took off her engagement ring with its tiny diamond, and 
handed it down to Mar>’. She set her gold wedding ring firmly, 
pulled the gloves back on, and faced the front. The pilot climbed 
into the front cockpit, and one of the sergeants threw -his weight 
on the wooden propeller. The little ship taxied away and turned, 
and down the field it roared and staggered into the air, and 
Olive was looking straight ahead and probably her eyes were 
closed. 

We followed it with our eyes as it swept up and away, leav- 
ing a lonesome silence behind it. The bond committee, the 
friends and relatives, the simple unhonoured spectators didn’t 
think of leaving the field. The plane became a speck in the sky 
towards Spreckles and disappeared. It was fifteen'minutes before 
we saw it again flying serenely and very high. Then to our 
horror it seemed to stagger and fall. It fell endlessly, caught 
itself, climbed, and made a loop. One of the sergeants laughed. 
For a moment the plane steadied and then it seemed to go 
crazy. It barrel-rolled, made Immelmann mrns, inside and out- 
side loops, and turned over and flew over the field upside down. 
We could see the black bullet which was our mother’s helmet. 
One of the soldiers said quiedy, ‘I think he’s gone nuts. She’s 
riot a jnimg woman.’ 

The aeroplane landed steadily enough and ran up to the 
' ^oup. The motor died. The pilot climbed out, shaking his head 
in perplexity. ‘Goddamdest woman I ever saw,’ he said. He 
rrached up and shook Olive’s nerveless hand and walked hur- 
riedly aw’ay. 

It took four men and quite a long time to get Olive out of the 
cockpit. She was so rigid they could not bend her. We took her 
horiie and put her to bed, and she didn’t get up for two days. 

What had happened came out slowly. The pilot talked some 
and Olive talked some, and both stories had to be put together 
before they made sense. They had flown out and circled the 
Spreckles Sugar Factory as ordered - circled it three times so 
-that our father would be sure to see, and then the pilot thought 
_ of a joke. He meant no harm. He shouted something, and his 

147 



face looked contorted. Olive could not hear over the noise of the 
engine. The pilot throttled down and shouted, ‘Stunt?’ It was 
a kind of joke. Olive saw his goggled face and the slip-stream . 
caught his word and distorted it. What Olive heard was the 
word ‘stuck’; ' 

Well, she thought, here it is, just as I kne\v it would be. Here 
was her death. Her mind flashed to see if she had forgotten any- 
thing -will made, letters burned, new underwear, plenty of food 
in the house for dinner. She wondered whether she had turned 
out the light in the back room. It was .aU in a second. Then she 
thought there might be an outside cliance of sundval. The yoimg 
soldier was obviously frightened and fear might be the worst 
thing that could happen to him in handling the situation. . If she 
gave way to the panic that lay on her heart it might frighten Iiim 
more; She decided to encourage him. She smiled brightly and 
nodded to give him courage, and then the bottom fell out of the 
world. When he levelled out of his loop the pilot looked back 
again and shouted, ‘More?’ - 

Olive was way beyond hearing anything, but her chin Was set 
and she was determined to help tlie pilot so that he would not 
be too afraid before they hit the earth. She smiled and nodded 
again. At the end of each stunt'he looked back, and each time 
she encouraged him. Afterwards he said over and over, ‘She’s 
the goddamdest woman I ever saw. I tore up the rule book and 
she wanted more. Good Christ, what a pilot .she would have 
made!’ 


CHAPTER 15 . 

I 

Adam sat like a contented cat on his land. From the en- 
trance^ to the little draw under a giant oak, which dipped its 
roots into underground water, he could look out over the acres 
IjTng away to the river and across to an alluvial flat and then up 
the rounded foothills on the western side. It was a fair place 
even in the summer when' the sun laced into it. A line of river 
willows and sycamores banded it in the middle, and the western 
hills were yellow-brown with feed. For some reason the moun- 
tains to the west of the Salinas Valley have a- tliicker skin of 

148 



earth on them than have the eastern foothills, so that the grass 
is richer there. Perhaps the peaks store rain and distribute it 
more evenly, and perhaps, being more wooded, they draw more 
rainfall. 

Very litde of the Sanchez, now Trask, place was under cultiva- 
tion, but Adam in his mind could see tlie wheat growing taU 
and squares of green alfalfa near die river. Behind him he could 
hear die rackety hammering of the carpenters, brought all the 
way from Salinas to rebuild the old Sanchez house. Adam had 
decided to live in the old house. Here was a place in which to 
plant his djmasty. The manure iras scraped out, the old floors 
tom up, neck-rubbed window casings ripped away. New sweet 
wood was going in, pine sharp with resin and velvety redwood 
and a new roof of long split shakes. The old thick walk sucked 
b coat after coat of whitewash made with lime in salt water. 


which, as it dried, seemed to have a luminosity of its own. 

He planned a permanent scat. A gardener had trimmed the 
ancient roses, planted geraniums, laid out the vegetable flat, and 
brought the living spring in little channels to wander back and 
forth through the garden. Adam foretasted comfort for himself 
and his descendants. In a shed, covered with tarpaulins, lay the 
crated heavy furniture sent from San Francisco and carted out 
from King City. 

He would have good living too. Lee, his pigtailcd Chinese 
' cook, had made a specib trip to Pajaro to buy the pots and 
kettles and pans, kegs, jars, copper, and glass for his kitchen. A 
new pigsty was building far from the house and down-wind, 
wth chicken and duck runs near and a kennel for the dogs to 
keep the coyotes away. It was no quick thing Adam contem- 
plated, to be finished and ready in a hurry. His men worked de- 
liberately and slowly. It was a long job. Adam wanted it well 
done. He inspected every wooden joint, stood off to study paint 
samples on-a shingle. In the comer of his room catalogues piled 
up -catalogues for machinerj', furnishings, seeds, fruit trees. He 
was glad now that his father had left him a rich man. In his 


mmd a darkness was settling over-his memory of Cormecticut. 
Perhaps the hard flat light of the West w’as .blotting out his 
birthplace. When he thought back to his father’s house, to the 
farm, town, to his brother’s face, there was a blackness over 
all of it. And he shook off the memories. 

Temporarily he had . moved. Cathy into the white-painted, 
clran spare house of Bordoni, there to await the home and the 
child. There was no doubt whatever that the child would be 


149 



finished well before the house \ras ready. But Adam was un- 
hurried. . . 

1 want it built strong,' he directed over and over. I want it 
to last -copper nails and hard wood - nothing to rust or rot.’ 

He was not alone in his preoccupation with the future. The 
whole valley, the whole West was that way. It was a time when 
the past load lost its sweetness and its sap. You’d go a good long 
road before you’d find a man, and he very old, who wished to 
bring back a golden past. Men were notched and comfortable in . 
the present, hard and unfruitful as it was, but only as a doorstep 
into a fantastic future. Rarely did two men meet, or three stand 
in a bar, or a dozen gnaw tough venison in camp, that the val- 
le>'’s future, paralysing in its grandeur, did not come up, not as 
conjecture but as a certainty. , 

‘It’ll be -who knows? maybe in our lifetime,* they said. 

And people found happiness in the future according to their 
present lack. Thus a man might bring his family down from a 
hill ranch in a drag - a big box nailed on oaken runners w'hich 
pulled bumping down the brciken hills. In the straw of the box 
his wife would brass- the children against the tooth-shattering, 
tongue-biting crash of the runners against stone and ground. 
And the fail.er would set his heels and think, ‘When the roads 
come in -then will be the time. W'hv, we’ll sit high and happy 
in a Surrey and get clear into King Citv in three hours -and 
what more in tlie world could vou want than that?’ 

Or let a man survey his gro\e of hve-oak trees, hard as coal 
and hotter, the best fircwoosi in the world. In his pocket might 
be a newspaper v ith a squib ‘Oak cord wood is bringing ten 
doll.trs a corsl in Los .Angeles, ' Win, hell, when the railroad puts 
a br.inch out liere, I could la% it down neat, broke up and sea- 
soned. right beside th.c track, for a dollar and a half a cord. Let’s 
go the u hole hog and s;n the Southern Pacific will charge three- 
fiftt to c.irrv It. There s still tnx' dvillars a cord, and there’s three 
thousand cords m that little groxe alone. That’s fifteen thousand 
dollars right there 

There \scre others who prophesied, wnh rays shining on their 
foreheads, about the sontetimc ditches that would carry water 
all over the vallev — who Knows.* mavbe in our lifetime — or 
deep wells w ith steam engines to pump the w ater up out of the 
guts of the world. Can vou imagine^ Just think what this land 
would raise with plenty of water' Why, it will be a frigging 
garden ' 

Another man, but he was cra/v, said that some day there’d be*. 

15u 



a way, maybe ice, maj'be some other way, to get a peach like this 
here I got in my hand clear to Philadelphia. 

In the towns they talked of sewers and inside toilets, and some 
already had them; and arc lights on the street corner - Salinas 
had those - and telephones. There wasn’t any limit, no boundary 
at all, to the future. And it would be so a man wouldn’t have ' 
room to store his happiness. Contentment would flood raging ¦ 
down the valley like the Salinas River in March of a thirty-inch 
year. 

They looked over the flat, dry, dusty valley and the ugly mush- 
room towns and they saw a loveliness - who knows? maybe in 
our lifetime. That’s one reason you couldn’t laugh too much at 
Samuel Hamilton. He let his mind range more deliciously than 
any other, and it didn’t sound so silly when you heard what 
they were doing in San Jose. Where Samuel went hajwire was 
wondering whether people would be happy when all that came. 

Happy? He’s hajavirc now. Just let us get it, and we’ll show 
you happiness. 

And Samuel could remember hearing of a cousin of his 
mother’s in Ireland, a knight and rich and handsome, and any- 
way shot himself on a silken couch, sitting beside the most 
beautiful woman in the world who loved him. 

‘There’s a capacity for appetite,’ Samuel said, ‘tliat a whole 
heaven and earth of cake can’t satisfy.’ 

Adam Trask nosed some of his happiness into futures, but 
there was present contentment in him too. He felt his heart 
smack up against his throat when he saw Cathy sitting in the 
sun, quiet, her baby growing, and a transparency to her skin 
that made him think of the angels on Sunday School cards. 
Then a breeze would move her bright hair, or she would raise 
her eyes, and Adam would swell out in his stomach with a pres- 
sure of ecstasy that was close kin to grief. 

If Adam rested like a sleek fed cat on his land, Cathy was cat- 
like too. She had the inhuman attribute of abandoning what she 
could not get and of waiting for what she could get. These uvo 
•gifts gave her great advantages. Her pregnancy Irad been an 
accident. When her attempt to abort herself failed and the doc- 
tor threatened her, she gave up that method. This does not mean 
fliat she reconciled herself to pregnancy. She sat it out as she 
would have weathered an illness. Her marriage to Adam had 
been the same. She was trapped.' and she took the best possible 
. way out. She had not wanted to go to California either, but 
other plans were denied her for the time being. As a very young 

151 



child she had learned to win by using the momentum of her 
opponent. It was easy to guide a man's strength where it was 
impossible to resist him. Very few people in the world could 
have known that Cathy did not want to be where she was and in 
the condition she was. She relaxed and waited for the change 
she knew must come some time. Cathy had the one quality re- 
quired of a great and successful criminal: she trusted no onCj 
confided in no one. Her self was an island. It is probable that 
she did not even look at Adam’s new land or building house, or 
turn his towering plans to reality in her mind, because she did 
not intend to live here after her sickness %vas over, after her trap 
opened. But to his questions she gave proper answers; to do 
othenvise would be waste motion, and dissipated energy, and 
foreign to a good cat. 

‘Sec, my darling, how the house lies -windows looking down 
the valley?’ 

‘It’s beautiful.’ 

‘You know, it may sound foolish, but I find myself trying to 
think the way old Sanchez did a hundred years ago. How was 
the valley then? He must have planned so carefully. You know, 
he had pipes? He did -made out of redwood with a hole bored 
or burned through to carry the water from the spring. We dug 
up some pieces of it.’ 

‘That’s remarkable,’ she said. ‘He must have been clever.’ 

‘I’d like to know more about him. From the way the house 
sets, the trees he left, the shape and proportion of the house, he 
must have been a kind of artist.’ 

‘He was a Spaniard, wasn’t he? They’re artistic people, I’ve 
heard. I remember in school about a painter -no, he was a 
Greek.’ 

‘I wonder where I could find out about old Sanchez.’ 

‘Well, somebody must know.’ 

All of his work and planning, and Bordoni kept cows in the 
house. You know what I wonder about most?’ 

‘What, Adam?’ 

‘I wonder if he liad a Catliy and who she was.’ . 

She smiled and looked down and away from him. ‘The things 
you say.’ 

He^ must have had 1 He must have had. I never had energy or 
direction or - well, even a very great desire to hve before I had 
you.’ 

'Adam, you embarrass me. Adam, be careful. Don’t ioede me. 
it hurts.’ - ' ’ 


152 



‘I’m sorry. I’m so clumsy.’ 

‘No, you’re not. You just don’t think. Should I be knitting or 
sewing, do you suppose? I’m so comfortable just sitting.’ 

‘We’ll buy everything we need. You just sit and be comfort- 
able. I guess in a way you’re working harder than anyone here. 
But the pay - the pay is wonderful ! ’ 

‘Adam, the scar on my forehead isn’t going to go away, I’m 
afraid.’ 

‘The doctor said it would fade in time,’ 

‘Well, sometimes it seems to be getting fainter, and then it 
comes back. Don’t you think it’s darker today?’ 

‘No, I don’t.’ 

But it was. It looked lilce a huge thumb-print, even to whorls 
of K'dnkled skin. He put his finger near, and she drew her head 
away. 

‘Don’t,’ she said. ‘It’s tender to the touch. It turns red if you 
touch it.’ 

‘It will go away. Just takes a little time, that’s all.’ 

She smiled as he turned, but when he walked away her eyes 
were flat and directionless. She shifted her body restlessly. The 
baby was kicking. She relaxed and all her muscles loosen^. She 
waited. 

Lee came near where her chair was set under the biggest oak 
tree. ‘Missy likee tea?’ 

‘No -yes, I would too.’ 

Her eyes inspected him and her inspection could not pene- 
trate the dark browm of his eyes. He made her tmeasy. Cathy had 
always been able to shovel into tlie mind of any man and dig up 
Ws impulses and lus desires. But Lee’s brain gave and repelled 
like rubber. His face was lean and pleasant, his forehead broad. 


firm, and sensitive, and his lips curled in a perpemal smile. His 
long black glossy braided queue, tied at the bottom with a nar- 
row piece of black silk, hung over his shoulder and moved 
rh}^!^^]^ against his chest. When he did violent work he 
curled his queue on top of his head. He wore narrow cotton 
trousers, black heel-Iess slippers, and a hogged Chinese smwfc. 
Whenever he could he hid his hands in his sleeves as though o 
were afraid for them, as most Chinese did in thaf day. 

‘I bling litta table,’ he said, bowed slightly, and shufle i }¦ 

Cathy looked after him, and her eyebrows drew . 
scowl. She was not afraid of Lee, yet she was not 
'dth him either. But he was a good and respectful s 
ficst. And what harm could he do her ? 


153 



II 


The summer progressed and’ the Salinas River retired under- 
ground or stood in green pools under high bar^. The cattle lay 
drowsing all day long under the wdllov\'S and only moved out at 
night to feed. An umber tone came to the grass. And the after- 
noon, winds blowing inetutably down the valley started a dust 
that was like fog and raised it into the sky almost as high as the 
mountain tops. The wild oat roots stood up like nig^r-heads 
where the winds blew the earth away. Along a polished earth, 
pieces of straw and twigs scampered until they were stopped by 
some rooted thing; and little stones rolled crookedly before the 
wind. ' , ' 

It became more apparent than ever why old Sanchez had 
built his house in the little draw, for the wind and the dust did 
not penetrate, and the spring, while it diminished/' still gushed a 
head of cold clear water. But Adam, looking out ov'er his dry 
dust-obscured land, felt the panic the Eastern man always does 
at first in California. In a Cormecticut summer two weeks with- 
out rain is a dry speU and four a drought. If the countryside is 
nor green it is dying. But in California it does not ordinarily 
rain at all between the end of May and the first of November. 
The Eastern man, though he has been told, feels the earth is sick 
in the rainless months. 

. Adam sent Lee with a note to the Hamilton place to ask 
Samuel to visit him and discuss the boring of some wells on his 
new place. 

Samuel was sitting in the shade, watching his son Tom design 
and build a revolutionary coon trap, when Lee drove up in the 
Trask cart. Lee folded his hands in his sleeves and waited. 
Samuel read the note. ‘Tom,’ he said, ‘do you think you could 
keep the estate going while I run down and talk water with h 
dry man?’ 

‘Why don’t I go with you? You might need some help.’ 

At talking? — that I don’t. It won’t come to digging for some 
time, if I’m any judge. With wells there’s got to be a great deal 
’ of talk -five or six hundreds words for c\'ery shovel of dirt.’ ' 

Id like to go — it’s Mr Trask, isn’t it? I didn’t meet him 
when he came here.’ 

‘You’ll do that when the digging starts. I’m older than you. 
I ve got. first claim on the talk. You know, Tom, a coon is going 
to reach lus pretty little hand through here and let himself out. 
You know how clever they are.’ 

154 



‘See this piece here? It screws on and turns down here. You 
couldn’t get out of that yourself.’ 

‘I’m not so clever as a coon. I think you’ve worked it out, 
though. Tom, boy, would you saddle Doxologj’ while I go tell 
your mother where I’m going?’ 

‘I bling lig,’ said Lee. 

‘Well, I have to come home some time.’ 

‘I bling back.’ 

‘Nonsense,’ said Samuel. ‘I’ll lead my horse in and ndc 
back.’ 

Samuel sat in the buggy beside Lee, and his clobber-footed 
saddle-horse shuffled clumsily behind. 

‘What’s your name?’ Samuel asked pleasantly. 

‘Lee. Got more name. Lee papa family name Call I^cc.’ 

Tve read quite a lot about China. You born in Chinn?’ 

‘No. Born here.’ 

Samuel was silent for quite a long time while the buggy 
lurched down the wheel track towards the dusty valley. ‘Lee,’ he 
said at last, T mean no disrespect, but I’ve never been able to 
figure why j'ou people still talk pidgin when an illiterate b.iboon 
from the black bogs of Ireland, with a head full of Gaelic and a 
tongue like a potato, learns to talk a poor grade of English in 
ten years.’ 

Lee grinned. ‘Me talkce Chinese talk,’ he said. 

'Well, I guess you have your reasons. And it’s not my affair. I 
hope you'll forgive me if I don’t believe it, Lee.’ 

Lee looked at him and the browm eyes under their rounded 
upper lids seemed to open and deepen until they weren’t foreign 
any more, but man’s eyes, warm with understanding. Lee 
chuckled. ‘It’s more than a convenience,’ he said. ‘It’s even more 
than self-protection. Mostly wc have to use it to be understood 
at all.’ 

Samuel showed no sign of havdng observed any change. ‘I 
ran understand the first uvo,’ he said thoughtfully, ‘but the 
third escapes me.’ 

Lee said, ‘I kno\y it’s hard to bclics’e, but it has happened so 
b my friends that wc take it for granted. If I 

s ou go up to a lady or a gentleman, for instance, and speak 
as l am doing now, I wouldn’t be understood.’ 
not?’ 

they’ll listen to. But English 
me th^ don’t fisten to, and so they don’t understand it.’ 
n that be possible? How do I understand you?’ 

155 



‘Thatls why I’m talldng to you. You are one of the rare people 
who can separate your observation from your preconception. 
You see what is, where most people see what they e-xpect.’ 

‘I hadn’t thought of it. And I’ve not been so tested as you,, 
but what you say has a handle of truth. You know. I’m very 
glad to talk to you. I’ve wanted to ask so many questions.’ 
‘Happy to oblige.’ 

'So many questions. For instance, you wear the queue. I’ve 
read that it is a badge of slavery imposed by conquest by the 
Manchus on the Southern Chinese.’ 

‘That is true.’ 

‘Then why in the name of God do you wear it here, where the 
Manchus can’t get at you?’ 

‘Talkee Chinese talk. Queue Chinese fashion -you savvy?’ 
Samuel laughed loudly. ‘That does have the green touch of 
convenience,’ he said. ‘I wish I had a hidey-hole like that.’ 

‘I’m wondering whether I can explain,’ said Lee. ‘Where 
there is no likeness of experience it’s very difficult.' I imderstand 
you were not bom in America.’ 

‘No, in Ireland.’ 

‘And in a few years you can almost disappear; while I, who 
was bom in Grass Valley, went to school and several years to 
the University of California, have no chance of mixing.’ 

‘If you cut your queue, dressed and talked like other people?’ 
‘No. I tried it. To the so-called whites I was stiU a Chinese, 
but an tm trustworthy one; and at the same time my Chinese 
friends steered clear of me. I had to give it up.’ 

) Lee pulled up under a tree, got out, and unfastened the check 
rein. ‘Time for lunch,’ he said. ‘I made a package. Would you 
like some?’ 

‘Sure I would. Let me get down in the sliade there. I forget to 
eat sometimes, and that’s strange because I’m always hungry. 
I’m interested in what you say. It has a sweet soimd of authority. 
Now it peeks into my mind that you should go back to China.’ 

Lee smiled satirically at him. ‘In a few minutes I don’t think 
you’ll find a loose bar I’ve missed in a lifetime of search. I did 
go back to China. Aly father was a fairly successful man. It 
didn’t work. They said I looked like a foreign devil; they said I 
spoke like a foreign devil. I made mistakes in manners, and I 
didn’t know delicacies that had grown up since my father left. 
They wouldn’t have me. You can believe it or not- I’m less 
foreign here than I was in China.’ 

‘I’ll have to believe you because it’s reasonable. You’ve given 

156 



me things to think about until at least February twenty-seventh. 
Do you mind my questions?’ 

‘As a matter of fact, no. The trouble with pidgin is that you 
get to thinking in pidgin. I write a great deal to keep my Eng- 
lish up. Hearing and reading aren’t the same' as speaking and 
UTiting.’ ’ 

‘Don’t you ever make a mistake? I mean, break into English?’ 

‘No, I don’t. I think it’s a matter of what is e.xpected. You 
look at a man’s eyes, you sec that he expects pidgin and a shuffle, 
so you speak pidgin and shuffle.’ 

‘I guess that’s right,’ said Samuel. ‘In my own wa}^ I tell jokes 
because people come all the tray to my place to laugh. I try to be 
funny for them even when the sadness is on me.’ 

‘But the Irish are said to be a happy people, full of jokes.’ 

¦" ‘There’s your pidgin and your queue. The>'’re not. They’re a 
dark praple with a gift for suffering way past their deserving. 
It’s said that without whisky to soak and soften tlie world, thej^’d 
kill themselves. But thej' tell jokes because it’s expected of them.’ 

Lee unwrapped a little bottle. ‘Would you like some of this? 
Chinee drink ng-ka-py.’ 

‘What is it?’ 


‘Chinee blandy. Stlong dlink - as a matter of fact it’s a brandy 
with a dosage of wormwood. Veiy' powerful. It softens the 
world.’ 

Samuel sipped from the bottle. ‘Tastes a little like rotten 
apples,’ he said. 

‘Yes, but nice rotten apples. Taste it back along your tongue 
towards the roots.’ 

Samuel took a big swallow and tilted his head back. ‘I see 
what you mean. That is good.’ 

‘Here are some sandwiches, pickles, cheese, a can of butter- 
mill:.’ 

‘You do well.’ 

Yes, I see to it.’ 

Samuel bit into a sandwich. ‘I was shuffling over half a hun- 
dred questions. What you said brings the brightest one up. You 
don’t mind?’ - 


Not at all. The only, thing I do want to ask of you is not to 
talk tWs way when other people are h'stening. It would only con- 
fuse them and they wouldn’t believe it anywa5'.’ 

I’ll try,’ said Samuel. ‘If I slip, just remember that I’m a 
comical genius. It’s hard to split a man down the middle and 
always to reach for the same half.’ 


157 



‘I think I can guess what your licxt question is.’ 

.‘What?’ 

‘Why am.I content to be a servant?’ 

‘How in the world did you know?’ 

‘It seemed to follow.’ 

‘Do you resent the question?’ 

‘Not from you. There are no ugly questions except those 
clothed in condescension. I don’t know where being a serv'ant 
came into disrepute. It is the refuge of a philosopher, the food 
of the lazy, and, properly carried out, it is a position of power, 
even of love. I can’t understand why more intelligent people 
don’t take it as a career -learn to do it well and reap its benefits. 
A good servant has absolute security, not because of his master’s 
kindness, but because of habit and indolence. It’s a hard thing 
for a man to change spices or lay out his owm socks. He’ll keep 
a bad servant rather than change. But a good servant, and I am 
an excellent one, can completely control his master, teU him 
what to think, how to act, whom to marry, when to divorce, re- 
duce him to terror as a discipline, or distribute happiness to him, 
and finally be mentioned in his will. If I had wished I could 
have robbed, stripped, and beaten anyone I’ve v/orked for and 
come away with thanks. Finally, in my circumstances I am un- 
protected. My master will defend me, protect me. You have to 
work and worry. I work less and worry less. And I am a good 
servant. A bad one docs no work and does no worrying, and he 
still is fed, clothed, and protected. I don’t know any profession 
tvherc the field is so cluttered with incompetents and where ex- 
cellence is so rare.’ 

Samuel leaned towards him, listening intently. 

Lee went on, ‘It’s going to be a relief after that to go back to 
pidgin.’ 

‘It’s a very short distance to the Sanchez place. Why did we 
stop so near?’ Samuel asked. 

‘Alice time talkee. Me Chinee number one boy. You leddy go 
now?’ 

'What? Oh, sure. But it must be a lonely life.’ 

'That’s the only fault with it,’ said Lee. I’ve been thinking of 
going to San Francisco and starting a little business.’ 

‘Like a laundry? Or a grocery store?’ 

‘No. Too many Chinese laundries and restaurants. I thought 
perhaps a bookstore. I’d like that, and the competition wouldn’t 
be too great. I probably won’t do it, though. A senTint loses his 
initiative.’ 


158 



rii 


In the afternoon Samuel and Adam rode over the land. The 
wind came up as it did every afternoon, and the yellow dust ran 
into the sky. 

‘Oh, it’s a good piece,’ Samuel cried. ‘It’s a rare piece of 
land.’ 

‘Seems to me it’s blowing away bit by bit,’ Adam observed. 

‘No, it’s just moving over a litde. You lose some to the James 
ranch but you get some from the Southeys.' 

‘Well, I don’t like the wind. Makes me nervous.’ 

‘Nobody liltes wind for very long. It makes animals nervous 
and restless too. I don’t know whether you noticed, but a little 
farther up the valley they’re planting windbreaks of gum trees. 
Eucalyptus - comes from Australia. They say the gums grow 
ten feet a year. Why don’t you try a few rows and see what hap- 
pens? In time they should back up the wind a little, and they 
make grand firewood.’ 

‘Good idea,’ Adam said. ‘What I really want is water. This 
wind would pump all the water I could find. I thought if I 
could bring in a few wells and irrigate, the topsoil wouldn’t blow 
away. I might try some beans.’ 

Samuel squinted into the wind. ‘I’ll try to get you w^ater if 
you want,’ he said. ‘And I’ve got a little pump I made that will 
bring it up fast. It’s my own invention. A windmill is a pretty 
costly thing. Maybe I could build them for you and save j'Ou 


some money.’ 

‘That’s good,’ said Adam, ‘I wouldn’t mind the wind if jt 
worked for me. And if I could get water I might plant alfalfa.’ 

‘It’s never brought much of a price.’ 

‘I wasn’t thinking of that. Few weeks ago I took a drive up 
around Greenfield and Gonzales. Some Swiss have moved in 
there. They’ve got nice little dairy herds and they get four crops 


of alfalfa a year.’ _ , ¦ 

‘I-heard about them. They brought in Swiss cows. 

Adam’s face was bright with plans. ‘That’s what I want 
do.^Sell butter and cheese and feed the milk to the pigs. 

‘You’re going to bring credit to the vaUey, amue 
You’re going to be a real joy to the future. _ 

' ‘If I can get water.’ j L„j.. - 

‘I’ll get you water if there’s any to be got. ujc-'.Hdle ¦ '¦ 
my magic wand.’ He patted a forked stick tie o 

Adam pointed to the left where a wide a p , 


159 



with a low growth of sagebrush. ‘Now then,’ he said, ‘thirty-six 
acres and almost as level as a floor. I put an auger down.. Top- 
soil averages three and a half feet, sand on top and loam within 
plough reach. Think you could get water there?’ 

¦ ‘I don’t know,’ Samuel said. ‘I’ll sec.’ ^ 

He dismounted, handed his reins to Adam, and untied his 
forked wand.' He took the forks in his two hands and walked 
slowly, his arms out and stretched before liim and the wand-tip 
up. His steps took a zigzag course. Once he frotvned and backed 
up a few steps, then shook his head and went on. Adam rode 
slowly along behind, leading the other horse. 

Adam kept his eyes on the stick. He saw it quiver and then 
jerk a little, as tltough an invisible fish were tugging at a line.- 
Samuel’s face tvas taut with attention. He continued on until the’ 
point of the wand seemed to be pulled strongly downward 
against his straining arms. He made a slow circle, broke off a 
piece of sagebrush, and dropped it on the ground. He moved 
well outside his circle, held up his stick again, and moved in- 
ward towards his marker. As he came near it, the point of the 
stick was drawn down again. Samuel sighed and relaxed and 
dropped his wand on the ground. ‘I can get water here,’ he said. 
‘And not very deep. The pull was strong, plenty of water.’ . 

‘Good,’ said Adam. ‘I want to show j'ou a couple more 
places.’ 

Samuel whittled out a stout piece of sagewood and drove it 
into the soil. He made a split on the top and fitted a crosspiece' 
on for a mark. Then he kicked the brittle brush down in the area 
so he could find his marker again. 

On a second try three hundred yards away the wand seemed 
nearly tom downwards out of his hands. ‘Now there’s a whole . 
world of water here,’ he said. 

The third try was not so productive. After half an hour he 
had only the slightest sign. 

The uvo men rode slowly back towards the Trask house. The 
afternoon was golden, for the yellow dust in the sky gilded the 
light. As always, the wind began to drop as the day waned, but 
it sometimes took half the night for the dust to settle out of tlie 
air. I knew it was a good place,’ Samuel said. ‘Anyone can see 
that. But I didn t know it was that good. You must have a great 
drain under your land from the mountains. You know how to 
pick land, Mr Trask.’ 

Adam smiled. We had a farm in Connecticut,’ he said. ‘For 
six generations ive dug stones out. One of the first tltings I re- 

160 



member is sledding stones over to the walls. I thought that was 
the way all farms were. It’s strange to me and almost sinful'here. 
If you wanted a stone, you’d have to go a long way for it.’ 

‘The ways of sin are curious,’ Samuel observed. ‘I guess if a 
man had to shuck off ever5rthing he had, inside and out, he’d 
manage to hide a few little sins somewhere for his own discom- 
fort. They’re the last things we’ll give up.’ 

‘Maybe that’s a good thing to keep us humble. The fear .of 
God in us.’ 

‘I guess so,’ said Samuel. ‘And I guess humility must be a 
good thing, since it’s a rare man who has not a piece of it, but 
when you look at humbleness it's hard to see where its value 
rests unless you grant that it is a pleasurable pain and very pre- 
cious. Suffering - 1 wonder has it been properly looked at.’ 

‘Tell me about your stick,’ Adam said. ‘How does it work?’ 

Samuel stroked the fork now tied to his saddle strings. ‘I don’t 
really believe in it, save that it works.’ He smiled at Adam. ‘May- 
be it’s this way. Maybe I know where the water is, feel it in my 
skin. Some people have a gift in this direction or that. Suppose 
-well, call it humility, or a deep disbeh'ef in myself, forced me 
to do a magic to bring up to the surface the thing I know any- 
way. Does that make any sense to you?’ 

‘I'd have to think about it,’ said Adam. 

- The horses picked their own way, heads hung low, reins 
loosened against the bits. 

‘Can you stay the night?’ Adam asked. 

‘I can, but better not. I didn’t tell Liza I’d be away the night. 
I’d not like to give her a worry.’ 

‘But she knows where you are.’ 

' ‘Sure she Imows. But I'll ride home tonight. It doesn’t matter 


he time. If you’d like to ask me to supper I d be glad. And 
vhen do you want me to start on the wells? 

‘Now - as soon as you can.’ _ , 

‘You know it’s no cheap thing, indulging yourself with water, 
t’d have to charge you fifty cents or more a foot, depending on 
what we find down there. It can run into money. ^ 

'I have the money. I want the wells. Look, Mr Hamilton 

‘ “Samuel” would be easier.’ , - „ „ 

‘Look, Samuel, I mean to make a garden my land, Bemem- 
her my name is Adam. So far I’ve had no Eden, let alone beei 
driven out’ . , , ' 

‘It’s the best reason I ever heard for making a gar en, a 
exclaimed. He chuckled. ‘Where will the orchard be. v 


161 



centre of the earth. I’ll squeeze wter out like juice from- an 
orange.’ 

They rode under the great oaks and towards the house. Adam 
said, ‘There she is, sitting outside.’ He shouted, ‘Cathy, he says 
there’s water — lots of it.’ Aside he said excitedly, “Did you know 
she’s going to have a baby?’ 

‘Even at this distance she looks beautiful,’ Samuel said. 


IV 

Because the day had been hot, Lee set a table outside under an 
oak tree, and as the sun neared the western mountains he padded 
back and forth from the kitchen, carrying the cold meats, pickles, 
potato salad, coconut cake, and peach pie which were supper. In' 
the centre of the table he placed a gigantic stoneware pitcher 
full of milk. 

Adam and Samuel came from the wash-house, their hair and 
faces shining with water, and Samuel’s beard was fluffy after 
its soaping. They stood at the trestle table and waited until' 
Cathy came out. 

She walked slowly, picking her way as though she were afraid 
she would fall. Her full skirt and apron concealed to a certain 
..extent her swelling abdomen. Her face was untroubled and 
' childlike, and she clasped her hands in front of her. She had 
• reached the table before she looked up and glanced from Samuel . 
"to Adam. 

. •V Adam hdd her chair for her. ‘You haven’t met Mr Hamilton, 
dear,’ he said. 

She held out her hand. ‘How do you do?’ she said. 

Samuel had been inspecting her. ‘It’s a beautiful place,’ he 
said, ‘I’m glad to meet you. You are well, I hope?’ 

‘Oil, yes. Yes, I’m well.’ 

The men sat down. ‘She makes it formal whether she wants to 
or not. Every meal is a kind of occasion,’ Adam’ said. 

‘Don't talk like that,’ she said. ‘It isn’t true.’ 

- ‘Doesn’t it feel like a party to you, Samuel?’ he asked, 

‘It does so, and I can tell you there’s never been such a candi- 
date for a party as I am. And my children— they’re worse. My 
boy Tom v/anted to come today. He’s spoiling to get off the 
ranch.’ 

Samuel suddenly realized that he was making his speech last 
to prevent silence from falling on the table. He paused, and the 
silence dropped. Cathy looked down at her plate while she ate a 

164 



sliver of roast lamb. She looked up as she put it between hCT 
small sharp teeth. Her wide-set eyes communicated nothing. 
Samuel shivered. 

‘It isn’t cold, is it?’ Adam asked. 

‘Cold? No. A goose walked over my grave, I guess.’ 

‘Oh, yes. I know that feeling.’ 

The silence fell again. Samuel waited for some speech to start 
up, knotving in advance that it would not. 

‘Do you like our valley, Mrs Trask?’ 

‘What? Oh, yes.’ 

‘If it isn’t impertinent to ask, when is your baby due?’ 

‘In about six weeks,’ Adam said. ‘My wife is one of those 
paragons - a W'oman who does not talk very much.’ 

‘Sometimes a silence tells the most,’ said Samuel, and he saw 
Cathy’s eyes leap up and down again, and it seemed to him that 
the scar on her forehead grew darker. Something had flicked her 
the way you’d flick a horse with the braided string popper on a 
buggy whip. Samuel couldn’t recall what he had said that had 
made her give a small inward start. He felt a tenseness coming 
over him that was somewhat like the feeling he had just before 
the water wand pulled dowTi, an awareness of something strange 
and strained. He glanced at Adam and saw that he tvas looking 
raptly at his wife. Whatever was strange was not strange to..- 
Adam. His face had happiness on it. 

Cathy was chewing a piece of meat, chewing with her front 
teeth. Samuel had never seen anyone chew that way before. And 
when she had swallowed, her little tongue flicked round her 
lips. Samuel’s mind repeated, ‘Something - something - can’t 
find what it is. Something wrong,’ and the silence hung on the 
table. 

There was a shuQle behind him. He turned. Lee set a teapot 
on the table and sbufBed away. 

Samuel began to talk to push the silence away. He told how 
he had first come to the valley fresh from Ireland, but within a 
few words neither Cathy nor Adam was listening to him. To 
prove itj he used a trick he had devised to discover whether his 
children were listening when they begged him to read to.Aem 
and would not let him stop. He toew in two sentences of non- 
sense. There was no response from either Adam or Cathy. He 
gave up. 

He bolted his supper, drank his tea scalding hot, and folded 
his napkin. ‘Ma’am, if you’ll excuse me. I’ll ride off home. And 
I thank you for your hospitality.’ • 

: 165 



. 'Good night,* she said. - _ 

Adam jumped to his feet. He seemed tom out of. a reverie. 
‘Don’t go now. I hoped to persuade you to stay the night.’ 

‘No, thank you, but that I can’t. And it’s not a long ride. I 
think -of coiirse, I know -there’ll be a moon.’ 

‘When will you start the wells?’ 

‘I’ll have to get my rig in order, do a piece of sharpening, and . 
put my house in order. In a few days I’ll send the equipment 
witlt Tom.’ 

The life was flowing back into Adam. ‘Make it soon,’ he said. 

‘I want it soon.- Cathy, we’re going to make the most beautiful 
place in the world. There’ll be nothing like it anywhere.’ 

Samuel switched his gaze to Cathy’s face. It did not change. 
The eyes were flat and the mouth with its small up-curve at tlie 
corners was carven. 

‘That ivill be nice,’ she said. 

For just a moment Samuel had an impulse to do or say . 
something to shock her out of her distance. He shivered again. 

‘Another goose?’ Adam asked. 

‘Another goose.’ The dusk was falling and already the tree 
forms were dark against the sky. ‘Good night, then.’ 

‘I’ll walk down with jou.’ 

‘No, stay with your wife. You haven’t finished your supper.’ 

•But I — ’ 

‘Sit down, man. I can find my own horse, and if I can’t I’ll 
steal one of yours.’ Samuel pushed Adam gently down in his 
chair. ‘Good night. Good night. Good night, ma’am.’ He walked 
quickly towards the shed. 

Old' platter-foot Doxologj' was daintily nibbling hay from the 
manger with lips like nvo flounders. The halter chain clinked 
against the wood. Samuel lifted down his saddle from the big 
nail w'hcre it hung by one wooden stirrup and swmng it over the 
broad back. He was lacing the latigo through tlie cinch rings 
when there was a small stir behind him. He turned and saw the 
silhouette of Lee against tlic last light from the open shadows.' 

‘When you come back ?’ the Chinese asked softly. 

•I don’t Imow. In a few days or a week. Lee, what is it?’ . 

‘What is what?’ 

By God, I got creepy ! Is there something wrong here?’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘You know damn well what 1 mean.’ 

‘Chinee boy jus’ workee-not hear, not talkee.’ 

‘Yes. I guess you’re right. Sure, you’re right. Sorry 1 asked 

166 



you. It wasn’t very good manners.’ He turned back, slipped the 
bit in Box’s mouth, and laced the big flop-ears into the head- 
stall. He slipped the halter and dropped it in the manger. ‘Good 
night, Lee,’ he said. 

‘Air Hamilton — ’ 

‘Yes?’ 

‘Do you need a cook?’ 

‘On my place I can’t afford a cook.’ 

‘I’d work cheap.’ 

‘Liza would kill you. Why - you want to quit?’ 

‘Just thought I’d ask,’ said Lee. ‘Good night.’ 

V 

Adam and C^thy sat in the gathering dark under the tree. 

‘He’s a good man,’ Adam said. ‘I like him. I wish I could 
persuade him to take over here and run this place -kind of 
superintendent.’ 

Cathy said, ‘He’s got his own place and his own family.’ 

‘Yes, I know. And it’s the poorest land you ever saw. He could 
make more at wages from me. I’ll ask him. It does take a time to 
get used to a new country. It’s like being bom again and having 
to learn all over. I used to know from what quarter the rains 
came. It’s different here. And once I knew in my skin whether 
wind would blow, when it would be cold. But I’ll learn. It just 
takes a little time. Are you comfortable, Cathy?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘One day, and not too far away, you’ll see the whole valley 
green with alfalfa — see it from the fine big windows of the 
finished house. I’ll plant rows of gum trees, and I’m going to 
send away for seeds and plants -put in a kind of experimental 
farm. I might try lichee nuts from China. I wonder if they 
would grow here. Well, I can try. Maybe Lee would tell me. 
And once the baby’s bom you can ride over the whole place 
. with me. You haven’t really seen it. Did I tell you? 2vir Hamil- 
ton is going to put up windmills, and we’ll be able to see them 
turning from here.’ He stretched his legs out comfortably under 
the table. ‘Lee should bring'candles,’ he said. ‘I wonder what’s 
keeping him.’ . 

Cathy spoke very quietly. ‘Adam, I didn’t want to come 
here. I am not going to stay here. As soon as I can I will go 
away.’ 

‘Oh, nonsense.’ He laughed.. ‘You’re like a child away from 

167 



home for the first time. You’ll love it once you get used to it.and 
the baby is born. You know, rvhen i first went atvay to the army 
I thought I was going to die of home-sickness. But I got over 
it. We all get over it. So don’t say silly things like that.’ 

‘It’s not a silly thing.’ 

‘Don’t talk about it, dear. . Everything will change after the 
baby is born. You’ll see. You’ll see.’ 

He capped his hands behind his head and looked up at the 
faint stars through the tree branches. 


CHAPTER 1 6 

I 

SAMUELH.'i MILTON rode back home in a night so flooded 
with moonlight that the lulls took on the qualitj' of the white 
and dusty moon. The trees and earth were moon-dry, silent and 
airless and dead. The shadows were black without shading and 
the open places white without colour. Here and there Samuel • 
could see secret movement, for the moon-feeders were at work - 
the deer which browse all night when the moon is clear and sleep 
under thickets in the day. Rabbits and field-mice and all otlier 
small hunted creatures that feel safer in the concealing light crept 
and hopped and crawled and froze to resemble stones or small 
bushes when car or nose suspected danger. The predators were 
working too -the long weasels like waves of brown light; the 
cobby wild cats crouching near to the ground, almost invisible 
: except when their yellow eyes caught light and flashed for a 
second; the foxes sniffling with pointed up-raised noses for a 
warm-blooded supper; the raccoon padding near still water, 
talking frogs. The coyotes nuzzled along the slopes and, tom 
with sorrow-joy, raised their heads and shouted their feeling, 
half keen, half laughter, at their goddess moon. And over all the 
shadow}' screech owls sailed, drawing a smudge of shadowy fear 
below them on the ground. The wind of the afternoon was gone 
and only a little breeze like a sigh was stirred by the restless 

thermals of the warm, dry hills. . • 

Doxology’s loud off-beat footsteps silenced the night people 
until after he had passed. Samuel’s beard glinted wliite, and his 
greying hair stood up high on his head. He had hung his black 
hat on his saddle horn. An ache was on the top of his stomach, 
an apprehension that was like a sick thought. It was a Wcltsch- 

168 



wzerz- which we used to call ‘Welshrats’ - the world sadness 
that rises into the soul like a gas and spreads despair so that you 
probe for the offending event and can find none. 

Samuel went back in his mind over the fine ranch and the 
indications of water -no Welshrats could come out of that tm- 
less he sheltered a submerged envy. He looked in himself for 
envy and could find none. He went on to Adam’s dream of a 
garden like Eden and to Adam’s adoration of Cathy. Nothing 
there unless —unless his secret mind brooded over his own healed 
loss. But that was so long ago he had forgotten the pain. The 
memory was mellow and warm and comfortable, now that it 
was all over. His loins and his thighs had forgotten hunger. 

As he rode through the light and dark of tree-shade and open 
'his mind moved on. When had the Welshrats started crawling in 
his chest? He found it then — and it was Cathy, pretty, tiny, 
delicate Cathy. But what about her? She was silent, but many 
women were silent. What was it? Where had it come from? He 
remembered that he had felt an imminence akin to the one that 
came to him when he held the water wand. And he remembered 
the shivers when the goose walked over his grave. Now he had 
pinned it. down in time and place and person. It had come at 
dinner and it had come from Cathy. 

He built her face in front of him and studied her wide-set ' 
eyes, delicate nostrils, mouth smaller than he liked but sweet, 
small firm chin, and back to her eyes. Were they cold? Was it 
her eyes? He was circling to the point. The eyes of Cathy had 
no message, no communication of any kind. There was nothing 
recognizable behind them. They were not human eyes. They re- 
minded him of something — what was it? - some memory, some 
picture. He strove to find it and then it came of itself. 

It rose out of the years complete with all its colours and its 
cries, its crowded feelings. He saw himself, a very little boy, so 
small that he had to reach high for his father’s hand. He felt the 
cobbles of Londonderry' under his feet and the crush and gaiety 
of the one big city he had seen. A fair, it was, with puppet 
shows and stalls of produce and horses and sheep penned right 
in the street for sale or trade or auction, and other stalls of 
bright-coloured knick-knackery, desirable and, because his father 
was gay, almost possessable. 

And then the people turned like a strong river, and they were 
carried along a narrow street as though they were chips on a 
flood tide, pressure at chest and back and the feet keeping up. 
The narrow street opened out to a square, and against the grey 

169 



vnW of a building there was a high structure of timbers and a 
noosed rop>e Iianging down. 

Samuel and his father were pushed and bunted by the \vater 
of people, pushed closer and closer. He could hear in his rnemory 
ear his father saying, ‘It’s no thing for a child. It’s no thing for 
anybody, but less for a child.* His father struggled to turn, to 
force his way back against the flood wave of people. ‘Let us out. 
Please let us out. I’ve a child here.’ 

The ware was faceless and it pushed without passion. Samuel 
raised his head to look at the structure. A group of dark-clothed, 
dark-hatted men had climbed up on the high platform. And in 
their midst \tos a man with golden hair, dressed in dark trou- 
sers and a light blue shirt open at the throat. Samuel and his 
father were so close that the boy had to raise his head high to 
see. 

The golden man seemed to have no arms. He looked out over 
tlie crowd and then looked down, looked right at Samuel. The 
picture was clear, lighted and perfect. The man’s eyes had .no 
depth -they were not like other eyes, not like the eyes of a man. 

Suddenly tlierc was quick movement on the platform, and 
Samuel’s father put both his hands on the boy’s head so that his 
palms cupped over the ears and his fingers met behind. The 
hands forced Samuel’s head down and forced his face tight in 
against his father’s black best coat. Struggle as he would, he 
could not move his head. He could see only a band of light 
aroimd the edges of his eyes and only a muffled roar of sound 
came to his ears tlirough his father’s hands. He heard heart-beats 
in his cars. Then he felt his father’s hands and arms grow rigid 
i with set muscles, and against his face he could feel his father’s 
deep-caught brcadiing and then deep intake and held breath, 
and his father’s hands, trembling. 

A little more there was to it, and he dug it up and set it before 
his eyes in the air ahead of the horse’s head -a worn and bat- 
tered table at a pub, loud talk and laughter. A pewter mug was 
in front of his fatlier, and a cup of hot milk, sweet and aromatic 
with sugar and cinnamon, before himself. His father’s lips were 
curiously blue and there were tears in his father’s eyes. 

‘I’d never have brought you if I’d known. It’s not fit for any 
man to sec, and sure not for a small boy.’ 

*I didn’t sec an5’,’ Samuel piped. ‘You held my head down.’ 

‘I’m glad of that.’ 

‘What was it?’ 

*I 11 have to tell you. They were killing a bad man.’ 

170 




open damper to heat the oven for the bread, which lay white 
and rising , in the pahs. Liza had been up before danm. She 
alwaj-s was. It was just as sinful to her to lie abed after light as 
it was to be abroad after dark. There was no possible virtue in 
either. Only one person in the world could with impunity and 
without crime lie bettveen her crisp ironed sheets aftCT dawn, 
after sun-up, et'cn to the far reaches of mid-moming, and that 
was her youngest and last born, Joe. 

Only Tom and Joe lived on the ranch now. And Tom, big 
and red, already cultivating a fine flowing moustache, sat at the 
kitchen table with his sleeves rolled down as he had been man- 
nered. Liza poured thick batter from a pitcher on to a soapstone 
griddle.' The hot cakes rose like little hassocks, and small vol- 
canoes formed and erupted on them until they were ready to be 
turned. A cheerful brown, they were, with tracings of darker 
brown. And the kitchen was full of the good sweet smdl of 
them. 

Samuel came in from the yard where he had been washing 
himself. His face and beard gleamed with water, and he turned 
down the sleeves of his blue shirt as he entered the kitchen. 
Rollcd-up sleeves at the table were not acceptable to Mrs Hamil- 
ton. They indicated either an ignorance or a flouting of the 
niceties. 

‘I’m late. Mother,’ Samuel said. 

She did not look round at him. Her spatula moved like a strik- 
ing snake and the hot cakes settled their white sides hissing on 
the soapstone. ‘What time was it you came home?’ she asked. 

'Oh, it was late - late. Must have been near eleven. I didn’t 
look, fearing to waken you.’ 

‘I did not waken,’ Liza said grimly. ‘And maybe you can find 
it healthy to rove all night, but the Lord God will do what He 
sees fit about that.’ It was well known tliat Liza Hamilton and 
the Lord God held similar convictions on nearly every subject. 
She turned and reached and a plate of crisp hot cakes lay be- 
tween Tom’s hands. ‘How does the Sanchez place look?’ she 
asked. 

Samuel went to his wife, leaned down from his height, and 
kissed her round red check. ‘Good morning. Mother. Give me 
your blessing.' 

‘Bless you,’ said Liza automatically. 

Samuel sat down at the table and said, ‘Bless you, Tom Well 
Mr Trask is making great changes. He’s fitting up the old 
house to live in.’ 


172 


Liza Uirned sharply from the stove. ‘The one tvhere the cows 
and pigs have slept the years?’ 

‘Ohj he’s ripped out the floors and window casings. AH new 
and new painted.’ , 

‘He’ll never get the smell of pigs out/ Liza said firmly. 
‘There’s a pungency left by a pig that nothing can wash out or 
cover up.’ 

‘Well, I went inside and looked around. Mother, and I could 
smell nothing except paint.’ 

‘When the paint dries you’ll smell pig,’ she said. 

‘He’s got a garden laid out with spring water running through 
it, and he’s set a place apart for flowers, roses and the like, and 
some of the bushes are coming clear from Boston.’ 

‘I don’t see how the Lord God puts up with such waste,’ she 
said grimly. ‘Not that I don’t like a rose myself.’ 

‘He said he’d try to root some cuttings for me,’ Samuel said. 

Tom finished his hot cakes and stirred his coffee. ‘What kind 
of a man is he, Father?’ - i 

‘Well, I think he’s a fine man — has a good tongue and a fair 
mind. He’s given to dreaming — ’ 

‘Hear now the pot blackguarding the kettle,’ Liza interrupted. 

‘I know. Mother, I know. But have you ever thought that my 
dreaming takes the place of something'! haven’t? Air Trask has 
practical dreams and the sweet dollars to make them solid. He 
wants to make a garden of his land, and he wiU do it too.’ 

‘What’s his wife like?’ Liza asked. 

‘Well, she’s very young and very pretty. She’s quiet, hardly 
speaks, but then she’s having her first baby soon.’ 

‘I know that,’ Liza said. ‘What was her name before?’ 

.‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Well, where did she come from?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

She put his plate of hot cakes in front of him and poured 
coffee in his cup and refilled Tom’s cup. ‘What did j^ou learn, 
then? How does she dress?’ 

‘Why, very nice, pretty -a blue dress and a little coat, pink 
but tight about the waist.’ 

‘You’ve an eye for that. Would you say they were made clorhes 
or store-bought?’ 

‘Oh, I think store-bought.’ 

‘You would not know,’ Liza said firml.v. "You — 

travelling suit Dessie made to go to San Jose v'es s.V 'o- 
bought.’ 


173 



‘Bessie’s the clever love/ said Samuel. ‘A needle sings in her 

Tom said, ‘Bessie’s thinking of opening a dressmaking shop 

in Salinas.’ ' ^ 

‘She told me,’ Samuel said. ‘She’d make a great success of it. 
‘Salinas?’ Liza put her hands on her hips. ‘Bessie didn’t tell 

Tm afraid we’ve done bad service to our dearie/ Samuel said. 
‘Here she wanted to save it for a real tin-plate surprise to her 
mother and we’w leaked it like wheat from a mouse-hole sack.’ 

‘She might have fold me,* said Liza. ‘I don t like surprises. 
Well, go on - wliat was she doing?’ 

‘Who?’ 

‘Why, Mrs Trask, of course.’ 

‘Boing? Why, sitting, in a chair under an oak tree. Her time’s 
not far.’ 

, ‘Her hands, Samuel, her hands - what was she doing with her 
hands?’ 

Samuel searched his memory. ‘Nothing, I guess. I remember - . 
she had little hands and she held them clasped in her lap/ 

Liza sniffed. ‘Not sewing, not mending, not knitting?’ ¦ ¦ 

‘No, iMother.’ 

‘I don’t know that it’s a good idea for you to go over there. 
Riches and idleness, devil’s tools, and you’ve not a very sturdy 
resistance.’ 

Samuel raised his head and laughed with pleasure. Some- 
times his wife delighted him, but he could nes'cr tell her how. 

.. ‘It’s only the riches I’ll be going there for, Liza. 1 meant to tell 
? you after breakfast so you could sit down to hear. He wants me ' 
to bore four or five wells for him, and maybe put windmills and 
storage tanks.’ 

‘Is it all talk? Is it a windmill turned by water? Will he pay 
you or will you come back c.\-cusing as usual. “He’ll pay when 
his crops comes in,” ’ she mimicked. ‘ “He’ll pay when his rich 
uncle dies.’’ It’s my experience, Samuel, and should be yours, 
that if the>’ don’t pay presently they never pay at all. We could 
buy a valley farm with your promises.’ 

‘Adam Trask will pay/ said Samuel. 'He’s well f- . d. His 
father left him a fortune. It’s a whole winter of work. Mother. 
We’ll lay something by and we’ll liavc a Christmas to scrape 
the stars. He’ll pay fifty cents a foot, and tlie windmills. Mother. 

I can make everrthing but the casings right here. I’ll need the 
Itoys to help. I want to take Tom and Joe.’ 

174 


‘Joe can’t go,’ she said. ‘You know he’s delicate.’ 

‘I thought I might scrape off some of His delicacy. He can 
starve on delicacy.’ 

‘Joe can’t go,’ she said finally. ‘And who is to run the ranch 
while you and Tom are gone?’ 

‘I thought I’d ask George to come back. He. doesn’t like a 
clerk’s job even if it is in King City.’ 

‘Like it he may not, but he can take a measure of discomfort 
for eight dollars a week.’ 

‘Mother,’ Samuel cried, ‘here’s our chance to scratch our 
name in the First National Bank! Don’t throw the weight of 
your tongue in the path of fortune. Please, Mother!’ 

She grumbled to herself all morning over her work while Tom 
and Samuel went over the boring equipment, sharpened bits, 
drew sketches of windmills new in design, and measured for 
timbers and redwood water-tanks. In the mid-moming Joe 
came out to join them, and he became so fascinated that he 
asked Samuel to let him go. 

Samuel said, ‘Off-hand I’d say I’m agafinst it, Joe. Your 
mother needs you here.’ 

‘But I want to go. Father. And don’t forget, next year I’U be . 
going to college in Palo Alto. And that’s going away, isn’t it? 
Please let me go. I’ll work hard.’ 

‘I’m sure you would if you could come. But I’m against it. 
And when you talk to your mother about it. I’ll thank you to let 
it slip that I’m against it. You might even throw in that I re- 
fused you.’ 

Joe grinned, and Tom laughed aloud. 

Will you let her persuade you?’ Tom asked. 

Samuel scowled at his sons. ‘I’m a hard-opinioned man,’ he 
said. ‘Once I’ve set my mind, oxen can’t stir me. I’ve looked at 
it from all angles and my word is -Joe can’t go. You wouldn’t 
want to make a liar of my word, would you?’ 

‘I’ll go and talk to her now,’ said Joe. 

‘Now, son, take it easy,’ Samuel called after him. ‘Use your; 
head. Let her do most of it. Meanwhile I’ll set my stubborn up.’ 

Two days later the big wagon pulled away, loaded with tim- 
bers and tackle. Tom drove four horses, and beside him Samuel 
and Joe sat swinging their feet. 


175 



CHAPTER 17 


I 

When I said Cathy was a monster it seemed to me that it 
u-as so. Now I have bent close with a glass over tlie small print 
of her and re-read the footnotes, and I wonder if it was true. 
The trouble is that since we cannot know what she wanted, we 
will never know whether or not she got it. If, rather than run- 
ning towards something, she ran away from something, we 
can’t know whether she escaped. Who knows but that she tried 
to tell someone or cver 5 'one what she was like and could not, 
for lack of a common language? Her life may have been her 
language, formal, de\'eloped, indecipherable. It is easy to say she 
was bad, but there is litde meaning unless we know why. 

I’ve built the image in my mind of Cathy, sitting quietly \rait- 
jng for her pregnanej' to be over, living on a farm she did not 
like, with a man she did not love. 

She sat in her chair under the oak tree, her hands clasped 
each to each in love and shelter. She grew very big -abnormally 
big, even at a time when women gloried in big babies and 
counted extra pounds with pride. She was misshapen; her belly, 
tight and heavy and distended, made it impossible for .her to 
stand without supporting herself with her hands. But die great 
lump was local. Shoulders, neck, arms, hands, face, were im- 
aflectcd, slender and girlish. Her breasts did not grow and her 
nipples did not darken. There was no quickening of milk 
glands, no physical planning to feed the newborn. When she 
sat behind a table }’ou could not sec that she was pregnant at 
all. 

In that day there was no measuring of pelvic arch, no testing 
of blood, no building with calcium. A woman gave a tooth for 
a child. It was the law. And a woman was likely to have strange 
tastes, some said for Tildi, and it was set down to the Eve nature • 
still under sentence for original sin. 

Cathy’s odd appedtc was simple compared to some. The car- 
penters, repairing the old house, complained that tltey could not 
keep the lumps of clialk witli which they coated their chalk ¦ 
lines. Again and again tlic scored hunks disappeared. Catliy stole 
them and broke them in little pieces. She carried the chips in 
her apron pocket, and when no one was about she crushed the 
soft lime between her teeth. She spoke very little. Her eyes were' 

176 



remote. It was as though she had gone away, leaving a breathing 
doll to conceal her absence. 

Activity surged around her. Adam went happily about build- 
ing and planning his Eden. Samuel and his boys brought in a 
well at forty feet and put down the new-fangled expensive metal 
casing, for Adam'wanted the best. 

The Hamiltons moved their rig and started another hole. 
They slept in a tent beside the work and cooked over a camp- 
fire. But there was always one or another of them riding home 
for a tool or with a message. 

Adam fluttered like a bewildered bee confused by too many 
flowers. He sat by Cathy and chatted about the pieplant roots 
just come in. He sketched for her the new fan blade Samuel had 
invented for the windmill. It had a variable pitch and was an 
unheard-of thing. He rode out to the well rig and slowed the 
work with his interest. And naturally, as he discussed wells with 
Cathy, his talk was all of birth and child care at the well head. 
It was a good time for Adam, the best time. He was the king of 
his wide and spacious life. And summer passed into a hot and 
fragrant autumn. 


II 

The Hamiltons at the well rig had finished their lunch of Liza’s 
bread and rat cheese and venomous coffee cooked in a can over 
• the fire. Joe’s eyes were heavy and he was considering how he 
could get away into the brush to sleep for a while. 

Samuel' knelt in the sandy soil, lool^g at the tom and broken 
edges of his bit. Just before they had stopped for lunch the drill 
had iound something thirty feet down that had mangled the 
. steel as though it were lead. Samuel scraped the edge of the 
blade with his pocket-knife and inspected the scrapings in the 
palm of his hand. His eyes shone with a childlike excitement. 
He held out his hand and poured the scrapings into Tom’s 
hand. 

‘Take a look at it, son. What do you think it is?' 

Joe wandered over from his place in front oPthe tent. Tom 
studied the fragments'in his hand, ‘Wliatever it is, it’s hard,’ he 
said. ‘Couldn’t be, a diamond that big. Looks like metal. Do you 
think we’ve bored into a buried locomotive?’ 

His father laughed. ‘Thirty feet down,’ he said admiringly. 

‘It looks like tool steel,’ said' Tom. ‘We haven’t got anything 
that can touch it.’ Then he saw the far-away joyous look on his 

177 



father’s face and a shiver of shared delight came to him. The 
Hamilton children loved it when their father’s mind went free. 
Then the world was peopled with wonders. ^ 

Samuel said, ‘Aletal, you say. You think, steel. Tom, I m 
going to make a guess and then I’m going to get an assay. Now 
hear my guess -and remember it. I think we’ll find nickel in' it, 
and silver maybe, and carbon and manganese. How I would like 
to dig it up! It’s in sea sand. That’s what we’ve been getting.’ 
Tom said, ‘Say, what do you, think it is with - nickel and 

silver — ’ _ ¦_ 

‘It must have been long thousand centuries ago,’ Samuel said, 
and his sons knew he was seeing it. ‘Maybe it was all water here 
-an inland sea with the seabirds circling and crying. And it 
would have been a pretty thing if it happened at night. There 
would come a line of light and then a pencil of white light and 
then a tree of blinding light drawn in a long arc from heaven. 
Then there’d be a great waterspout and a big mushroom of 
steam. And your ears would be staggered by the sound because 
the roaring cry of its coming would be on you at the same time 
the water e.xploded. And then it would be black night again be- 
cause of the blinding light. And gradually you’d see the lolled 
fish coming up, showing silver in the starlight, and the crying 
birds would come to eat them. It’s a lonely, lovely thing to think 
about, isn’t it?’ 

He made them see it as he always did. 

Tom said softly, ‘You think it’s a meteorite, don’t you?’ 

'That I do, and we can prove it by assay.’ 

Joe said eagerly, ‘Let’s dig it up.’ 

‘You dig it, Joe, while we bore for water.’ 

Tom said seriously, ‘If the assay showed enough nickel and 
silver, wouldn’t it pay to mine it?’ 

‘You’re my own son,’ said Samuel. ‘We don’t Imow whether 
it’s big as a house or little as a hat,’ 

‘But we could probe down and sec.’ 

,‘That we could if we did it secretly and hid our thinking 
under a pot.’ 

‘Why, what do you mean?’ 

‘Now, Tom, have you no kindness towards your motlicr? We 
give her enough trouble, son. She’s told me plain that if I spend 
any more money patenting things, she’ll give us trouble to re- 
member. Have pity on her I Can’t you sec her shame when you 
ask her what \vc re doing? She’s a truthful woman, your 
mother. She’d have to say, “They’re at digging up a star.” ’ He 

178 



laughed happily. ‘She’d never live it down. And she’d make us 
smart. No pies for three months.’ 

Tom said, ‘We can’t get through it. We’ll have to' move to 
another place.’ 

‘I’ll put some blasting powder down,’ said his father, ‘and if 
that doesn’t crack it aside we’ll start a new hole.’ He stood up. 
‘I’ll have to go home for powder and to sharpen the drill. Why 
don’t you boys ride along with me and we’ll give Mother a sur- 
prise so that she’ll cook the whole night and complain. That 
way she’ll dissemble her pleasure.’ 

Joe said, ‘Somebody’s coming, coming fast,’ And indeed they 
could see a horseman riding towards them at full gallop, but a 
curious horseman who flopped about on his moimt like a tied 
chicken. When he came a little closer they saw that it was Lee, 
his elbows waving like wings, his queue lashing about like a 
snake. It was surprising that he stayed on at all and still drove 
the horse at full tilt. He pulled up, breathing heavily. ‘Missy 
Adam say come! Miss Cathy bad -come quick. Missy yell, 
scream.’ 

Samuel said, ‘Hold on, Lee. When did it start?’ 

‘Mebbe bleakfus time.’ 

‘All right. Calm yourself. How is Adam?’ 

‘Missy Adam clazy. Cly - laugh —make vomit.’ 

‘Sure,’ said Samuel. ‘These new fathers. I was one once. Tom, 
throw a saddle on for me, will you?’ 

Joe said, ‘What is it?’ 

‘Why, Mrs Trask is about to have her baby. I told Adam I’d 
stand by.’ 

‘You?’ Joe asked. 

Samuel levelled his eyes on his youngest son. ‘I brought both 
of you into the world,’ he said. ‘And you’ve given no evidence 
you think I did a bad service to the world. Tom, you get all the 
tools gathered up. And go back to the ranch and sharpen^ the 
metal. Bring back the box of powder that’s on the shelf in the 
tool-shed, and go easy with it as you love your arms and legs. 
Joe, I want you to stay here and look after things.’ 

Joe said plaintively, ‘But what will I do here alone?’ 

Samuel was silent for a moment. Then he said, ‘Joe, do you 
love me?’ 

‘Why, sure.’ ^ 

‘If you heard I’d committed some great crime, would y' ‘urn 
me over to the police?’ 

‘What are you talking about? ’ 

179 



“Would you?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘All right, then. In my basket, under my clothes, you’ll find 
ttvo books -new, so be gentle with them. It’s two volumes by_a 
man the world is going to hear from. You can start reading if 
you want and it will raise up your lid a little. It’s called The 
Principles of Psychology and it’s by an Eastern man named Wil- 
liam James. No relation to the train robber. And, Joe, if you ever 
let on about the books I’ll run you off the ranch. If your motlier 
ever found out I spent the money on them she’d run me off the 
ranch.’ 

Tom led a saddled horse to him. ‘Can I read it next?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Samuel, and he slipped his leg lightly over the 
saddle. ‘Come on, Lee.’ 

The Chinese wanted to break into a gallop, but Samuel re- 
strained him. ‘Take it easy, Lee. Birthing takes longer than you 
think, mostly.’ 

For a time they rode in silence, and then Lee said, ‘I’m sorry 
you bought those books. I have the condensed form, in one 
volume, the textbook. You should, have borTp>ycd it.’ _ 

‘Have you now? Do you have many broks?’ 

‘Not many here -thirty or forty. But you’re welcome to any 
of them you haven't read.’ 

‘Thank you, Lee. And you may be sure I’ll look the -first 
moment I can. You know, you could talk to my boys. Joe’s a 
little flighty, but Tom’s all right and it would do him good.’ 

¦ ,r ‘It’s a hard bridge to cross, Mr Hamilton. Makes me timid to" 
¦'talk to a new person, but I’ll try if you say so.’ 

They walked the horses rapidly towards the little draw of the 
Trask place. Samuel said, ‘Tell me, how is it with the mother?’ 

‘I’d ratiter you saw for yourself and thought for yourself,’ Lee 
said. ‘You knov/, when a man lives alone as much as I do, his 
mind can go off on an irrational tangent just because his social 
world is out of kilter.’ 

Tes, I know. But I’m not lonely and I’m on a tangent too. 
But' maybe not the same one.’ 

‘You don’t think I imagine it, then?’ 

‘I don’t know w'hat it is, but I’H tell you for your reassurance 
tliat I’ve a sense of strangeness.’ 

‘I guess that’s all it is with me too,’ said Lee. He smiled. Til 
tell you how far it got with me, though. Since I’ve come here I 
find myself thinking of Chinese fairy tales my father told me. 
We Chinese have a well-developed demonology.’ 

180 



‘You think she is a demon?’ 

‘Of coinrse not/ said Lee. ‘I hope I’m a little beyond such silli- 
ness. I don’t know what it is. You know, Mr Hamilton, a ser- 
vant develops an ability to taste the wind and judge the climate 
of the house he works in. And there’s a strangeness here. Maybe 
that’s what makes me remember my father’s demons.’ 

‘Did your father believe in them?’ 

‘Oh, no. He thought I should know the background. You 
Occidentals perpetuate a good many myths too.’ 

Samuel said, ‘Tell me what happened to set you off. This 
morning, I mean.’ 

‘If you weren’t coming I would try,’ said Lee. ‘But I would 
rather not. You can see for yourself. I may be crazy. Of course 
Mr Adam is strimg so tight he may snap like a banjo string.’ 

‘Give me a little hint. It might save time. What did she do?’ 

‘Nothing. That’s just it. Mr Hamilton, I’ve been at births 
before,"a good many of them, but this is something new to me.’ 

‘How?’ 

‘It’s - well - I’ll teU you the one thing I can think of. This is 
much more like a bitter, deadly combat than a birth.’ 

As they rode into the draw and under the oak trees Samuel 
said, .‘I hope you haven’t got me in a state, Lee. Ifs a strange 
day, and I don’t know why.’ 

‘No wind/ said Lee. ‘It’s the first day in the month when 
there hasn’t been wind in the afternoon.’ 

‘That’s so. You know, I’ve been so close to the details I’ve 
paid no attention to the clothing of the day. First we find a 
buried star and now we go to dig up a mint-new human.’ He 
looked up through the oak branches at the yellow-ht hills. ‘What 
a beautiful day to be bom in!’ he said. ‘If signs have their 
fingers on a life, it’s a sweet life coming. And, Lee, if Adam 
plays true, he’ll be in the way. Stay close, will you? In case I 
need something. Look, the men, the carpenters, are sitting under 
that tree.’ 

‘Air Adam stopped the work. He thought the hammering 
might dismrb his wife.’ 

Samuel said, ‘You stay close. That s'ounds like Adam playing 
true. He doesn’t know his wife probably couldn’t hear (^d 
Himself beating a tattoo on the sky.’ 

The workmen sitting imder the tree waved to him. ‘How do, 
Mr Hamilton. How’s your family?’ 

‘Fine, fine. Say, isn’t that Rabbit Holman? Where’ 

. been, Rabbit?’ : • 


181 



•‘Went prospecting, Jvir Hamilton.’ 

‘Find anything, Rabbit?’ 

‘Hell, Mr Hamilton, I couldn’t even find the mule I went out 

\V3th/ , ^ , ' ' 

They rode on towards the house. Lee said quickly, ‘If you 
ever get a minute, I’d like to show you something. 

‘What is it, Lee?’ 

“Well, I’ve been trying to translate some old Chinese poetry 
into English. I’m not sure it can be done. Will you take a look?’ 
‘I’d like to, Lee. Why, that would be a treat for me.’ 

Ill 

Bordoni’s white frame house was very quiet, almost broodingly 
quiet, and the blinds were pulled down. Samuel dismounted at 
the stoop, untied his bulging saddlebags, and gave his horse to 
Lee. He Imocked and got no answer and went in. It was dusky 
in the living-room after the outside light. He looked in the kit- 
chen, scrubbed to the wood grain by Lee. A grey stoneware pilon 
coffee-pot grunted on the back of the stove. Samuel tapped 
lightly on the bedroom door and went in. 

It was almost pitch-black inside, for not only were the blinds 
dowm but blankets were tacked over the windows. Cathy was 
lying in the big four-poster bed, and Adam sat beside her, his 
face buried in the coverlet. He raised his head and looked blindly 
K out. , 

'¦ Samuel said pleasantly, ‘Why arc you sitting in the dark?’ 

Adam’s voice was hoarse. ‘She doesn’t want the light. It hurts 
her eyes.’ 

Samuel walked into the room and authority grew in him with 
each step. ‘There will liavc to be light,’ he said. ‘She can close 
her eyes. I’ll tie a black cloth over them if she wants.’ He moved 
to the window and grasped the blanket to pull it down, but 
Adam was upon him before he could yank. 

‘Leave it. The light hurts her,’ he said fiercely. 

Samuel turned on him. ‘Now, Adam, I know what you feel. 
I pro.mised you I’d take care of tilings, and I will. I only hope 
one of those things isn’t you.’ He pulled the blanket down and 
rolled up the blind to let the golden afternoon light in. 

Cathy made a little mewing sound from the bed. and Adam 
went to her. ‘Close your eyes, dear. I’ll put a cloth over your 
cj-es.’ 

Samud dropped his saddlebags in a chair and stood beside the 

182 


bed. ‘Adam/ he said firmly, ‘I’m’ going to ask you to go out of 
the room and to stay out.’ 

‘No, I can’t. Why?’ 

‘Because I don’t want you in the wa}'. It’s considered a sweet 
practice for you to get drunk.’ 

‘I couldn’t.’ 

Samuel said, ‘Anger’s a slow thing in me and disgust is slower, 
but I can taste the beginnings of both of them. You’ll get out of 
the room and give me no trouble or I’ll go away and you’ll have 
a basket of trouble.’ 

Adam went finally, and from the doorway Samuel called, 
‘And I don’t want you bursting in if you hear anything. You 
wait for me to come out.’ He closed the door, noticed there was 
a key in the lock, and turned it. ‘He’s an upset, vehement man,’ 
he said. ‘He loves you.’ 

He had not looked at her closely until now. And he saw true 
hatred in her eyes, tmforgiving, murderous hatred. 

‘It’ll be over before long, dearie. Now tell me, has the water 
broke?’ 

Her hostile ej'es glared at him and her lips raised snarling 
from her little teeth. She did not answer him. 

He stared at her. ‘I did not come by choice except as a friend,’ 
he said. ‘It’s not a pleastire to me, young woman. I don’t know 
your trouble and minute by minute I don’t care. Maybe I can 
save you some pain -who knows? I’m going to ask you one 
more question. If you don’t ansv/er, if you put that snarling 
look on me I’m going out and leave you to welter.’ 

The words struck into her imderstanding like lead shot 
dropped in water. She made a great effort. And it gave him a 
shivering' to see her face change, the steel leave her eyes, the 
lips thicken from line to bow, and the corners turn up. He 
noticed a movement of her hands, the fists unclench and the 
fingers turn pinkly upwards. Her face became young and inno- 
cent and bravely hurt. It was like one magic-lantern slide tak- 
ing the place of another. 

She said softly, ‘The water broke at dawn.’ 

‘That’s better. Have 5'ou had hard labour?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘How far apart?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Well, I’ve been in this room fifteen minutes.’ 

‘I’ve had two little ones - no big ones since you c? 

‘Fine. Now where’s your linen?’ 

183 




‘I don’t know.’ 

Well, have you got any whisky? I’ll pour some whisky on 
it.’ 

‘In the second drawer.’ 

He splashed whisky on his bleeding hand and kneaded the 
flesh against the alcohol sting. A strong quaking was in his 
stomach and -a sickness rose up against his eyes. He took a swal- 
low of whisky to steady himself. He dreaded to look back at the 
bed; ‘My hand won’t be much good for a while,’ he said. 

Samuel told Adam afterwards, ‘She must be made of whale- 
bone. The birth happened before I was ready. Popped like a 
seed. I’d not the water ready to wash him. Why, she didn’t even 
touch the pulling rope to bear down. Pure whalebone, she is.’ 
He tore at the door, called Lee and demanded warm water. 
Adam came charging into the room. ‘A boy!’ Samuel cried. 
‘You’ve got a boy! Easy,’ he said, for Adam had seen the mess 
-in the bed and a green was rising in his face. 

Samuel said, ‘Send Lee in here. And you, Adam, if you still 
have the authority to tell your hands and feet what to do, get to 
the Idtchen and make me some coffee. And see the lamps are 
filled and the chimneys clean.’ 

Adam turned like a zombie and left the room. In a moment 
Lee looked in. Samuel pointed to the bundle in a laundry bas- 
ket. ‘Sponge him off in warm water, Lee. Don’t let a draught get 
on him. ‘Lord ! I wish Liza were here. I can’t do everything at 
once.’ 

He turned back to the bed. ‘Now, dearie. I’ll get you cleaned 
up.’ 

Cathy was bowed again, snarling in her pain. ‘It’ll be over in 
a little,’ he said. ‘Take a little time for the residue. And you’re so 
quick. Why, you didn’t even have to pull on Liza’s rope.’ He saw 
something, stared, and went quickly to work. ‘Lord God in 
Heaven, it’s another one!’ 

' He worked fast, and as with the first the birth was incredibly 
quick. And again Samuel tied the cord. Lee took the second 
baby, washed it, wrapped it, and put it in the basket. 

Samuel cleaned the mother and shifted her gently while he 
changed the linen on the bed. He found in himself a reluctance 
to look in her face. He worked as quickly as he could, for his 
bitten hand was stiffening. He drew a clean white sheet up to 
her chin and raised her to sh’p a fresh pillow under her head. At 
last he had to look at her. 

Her golden hair was wet , with perspiration but her face had 

185 



changed. It was stony, expressionless. At her throat the pulse 

fluttered visibly. „ 

‘You have two sons,’ Samuel said. 'Two fine sons. They aren t 

alike Each one born separate in his own sack.’ 

She inspected him coldly and without interest. 

Samuel said. Til show your boys to you.’ 

‘No,’ she said without emphasis. 

‘Now, dearie, don’t you want to see your sons?’ 


•No. I don’t want them.’ 

‘Oh, you’ll change. You’re tired now, but you’ll change. And 
I’ll tell you now - this birth was quicker and easier than I’ve seen 


ever in my life.’ 

¦ ' The eyes moved from his face. ‘I don’t want them. I want you 
to cover the windows and take the light away.’ 

‘It’s weariness. In a few days you’ll feel so different you won’t 
remember.’ 

‘I’ll remember. Go away. Take them out of the room. Send 


Adam in.’ 

Samuel was caught by her tone. There was no sickness, no 
weariness, no sofmess. His words came out without his will. ‘I 
don’t like you,’ he said and wished he could gather the words 
back into his tlrroat and into his mind. But his words had no 
effect on Cathy. 

‘Send Adam in.’ 

In the little living-room Adam looked vaguely at his sons and 
went quickly into the bedroom and shut the door. In a moment 
came the sound of tapping. Adam was’ nailing the blankets over 
the windows again. 

Lee brought coffee to Samuel. ‘That’s a bad-looking hand you 
have there,’ he said. 


‘I know. I’m afraid it’s going to give me trouble.’ 

‘Why did she do it?’ 

'I don’t know. She’s a strange thing.’ 

Lee said, ‘Mr Hamilton, let me take care of that. You could 
lose an arm.’ 

The life went out of Samuel. ‘Do what you want, Lee. . A 
frightened sorrow lias closed down over my heart. I wish I were 
a child so I could cry. I’m too old to be afraid like this. And I’ve 
not felt such despair since a bird died in my liand by a flowing 
water long ago.’ 

I..ec left the room and shortiy returned, carrying a small ebony 
box carved with twisting dragons. He sat by Samuel and from his 
box took a wedge-shaped Chinese razor. ‘It will hurt,’ he said softly. 


186 



' ‘FU try to bear it, Lee.’ 

The Chinese bit his lips, feeling the inflicted pain in himself 
while he cut deeply into the hand, opened the flesh around the 
toothmarks front and back, and trimmed the ragged flesh away 
until good red blood flowed from every wound. He shook a. 
bottle of yellow emulsion labelled Hall’s Cream Salve and pbiured 
it into the deep cuts. He saturated a handkerchief with the salve 
and wrapped the hand. Samuel winced and gripped the chair 
arm with his good hand. 

TFs mostly carbolic acid,’ Lee said. ‘You can smell it.’ 

‘Thank you, Lee. I’m being a baby to knot up like this.’ 

‘I don’t think I could have been so quiet,’ said Lee. ‘I’ll get 
you another cup of cofi^ee.’ 

He came back with two cups and sat down by Samuel. ‘I 
think I’ll go away,’ he said. ‘I never went willingly to a slaugh- 
ter-house.’ 

Samuel stiffened. ‘What do you mean?’ 

‘I don’t know. The words came out.’ 

Samuel shivered. ‘Lee, men are fools. I guess I hadn’t 
thought about it, but Chinese men are fools too.’ 

‘What made you doubt it?’ 

‘Oh, maybe because we think of strangers as stronger and 
better than we are.’ 

‘What do you want to say?’ 

Samuel said, ‘Maybe the foolishness is necessary, the dragon 
fighting, the boasting, the pitiful courage to be constantly 
knocking a chip off God’s shoulder, and the childish cowardice 
that makes a ghost of a dead tree beside a darkening road. 
Maybe that’s good and necessary, but — ’ 

‘What do you want to say?’ Lee repeated patiently. 

‘I thought some wind had blown up the embers' of my 
foolish mind,’ Samuel said. ‘And now I hear in your voice that 
you have it too. I feel wings over this house. I feel a dreadful- 
ness coming.’ 

‘I feel it too.’ 

‘I^know you do, and that makes me take less than my usual 
comfort in my foolishness. This birth was too quick, too easy - 
like a cat having kittens. And I fear for these kittens. I have 
dreadful thoughts gnawing to get. into my brain.’ 

‘What do you want to say?’ Lee asked a third time. • 

‘I want my wife,’ Samuel cried. ‘No dreams, no ghosts, no 
foolishness.' I want her here. They say miners take paries 
into the pits to test the air. Liza has no truck with foolishness. 

187 



changed. It was stony, expressionless. At her throat the pulse 

fluttered visibly. . ' „ . 

•You have two sons/, Samuel said. ‘Two fine sons. They aren t 

alike Each one born separate in his own sack.’ 

She inspected him coldly and without interest. 

, Samuel said, TU show your boys to you.’ 

‘No/ she said without emphasis. 

‘Now, dearie, don’t you want to see your sons?’ 

‘No. I don’t want them/ 

‘Oh, you’ll change. You’re tired now, but you’ll change. And 
I’ll tell you now -this birth was quicker and easier than I’ve seen 


ever in my life/ . 

. The eyes moved from his face. ‘I don’t want them. I want you 
to cover the windows and take the light away.’ 

' ‘It’s weariness. In a few days you’ll feel so different you won’t 
remember.’ 

‘I’ll remember. Go away. Take them out of the room. Send 
Adam in.’ 

Samuel was caught by her tone. There was no sickness, no 
weariness, no sofmess. His words came out without his will. ‘I 
don’t like you/ he said and wished he could gather the words 
back into his throat and into his mind. But his words had no 
effect on Cathy. 

‘Send Adam in.’ 

In the little living-room Adam looked vaguely at his sons and 
went quickly into the bedroom and shut the door. In a moment 
came the sound of tapping. Adam was' nailing the blankets over 
the windows again. 

Lee brought coffee to Samuel. ‘That’s a bad-looking hand you 
have there/ he said. 

‘I know. I’m afraid it’s going to give me trouble.’ 

‘Why did she do it?’ 


‘I don’t know. She’s a strange thing.’ 

Lee said, ‘Mr Hamilton, let me take care of that. You could 
lose an arm.’ 

The life went out of Samuel. ‘Do what you want, Lee. A 
frightened sorrow has dosed down over my heart. I wish I were 
a child so I could cr%’. I’m too old to be afraid like this. And I’ve 
not felt such despair since a bird died in my hand by a flowing 
water long ago.’ 


Lee left the room and shortly returned, carrying a small ebony 
box can-ed with nvisting dragons. He sat by Samuel and from his 
box took a wedge-shaped Chinese razor. ‘It will hurt/ he said softly. 


186 



‘Fll try to bear it, Lee.’ 

The Chinese bit his lips, feeling the inflicted pain in himself 
while he cut deeply into the hand, opened the flesh around the 
toothmarks front and back, and trimmed the ragged flesh away 
until good red blood flowed from every wound. He shook a. 
bottle of yellow emulsion labelled Hall’s Cream Salve and poured 
it into the deep cuts. He saturated a handkerchief with the salve 
and wrapped the hand. Samuel winced and gripped the chair 
arm with his good hand. 

‘It’s mostly carbohc acid,’ Lee said. ‘You can smeU it’ 

‘Thank you, Lee. I’m being a baby to knot up like this.’ 

‘I don’t think I could have been so quiet,’ said Lee. ‘I’ll get 
you another cup of coffee.’ 

He came back tvith two cups and sat down by Samuel. .‘I 
think I’ll go away,’ he said. ‘I never went willingly to a slaugh- 
ter-house.’ 

Samuel stiffened. ‘What do you mean?’ 

‘I don’t know. The words came out.’ 

Samuel shivered. ‘Lee, men are fools. I guess I hadn’t 
thought about it, but Chinese men are fools too.’ 

‘What made you doubt it?’ 

‘Oh, maybe because we think of strangers as stronger and 
better than we are.’ 

‘What do you want to say?’ 

Samuel said, ’Maybe the foolishness is necessary, the dragon 
fighting, the boasting, the pitiful courage to be constantly 
knocking a chip off God’s shoulder, and the childish cowardice 
that makes a ghost of a dead tree beside a darkening road. 
Maybe that’s good and necessary, but — ’ 

‘What do you want to say?’ Lee repeated patiently. 

‘I thought some wind had blown up the embers' of my 
foolish mind,’ Samuel said. ‘And now I hear in your voice that 
you have it too. I feel wings over this house. I feel a dreadful- 
ness coming.’ 

‘I feel it too.’ 

‘I^ know you do, and that makes me take less than my usual 
comfort in my foolishness. This birth was too quick, too easy — 
like a cat having kittens. And I fear for these kittens. I have 
dreadful thoughts gnawing to get. into my' brain.’ 

‘What do you Want to say?’ Lee asked a third time. ¦ 

‘I want my wife,’ Samuel cried. ‘No dreams, no ghosts, no 
foolishness. I want her here. They say miners take canaries 
into the pits to test the ah. Liza has no truck with foolishness. 

' 187 “¦ 



AndjLee, if Liza sees a ghost, it’s a ghost and not a fragment of . 
a dream. If Liza feels trouble we’ll bar tlic doors.’ 

Lee got up and went to the laundry basket and looked down 
at the babies. He had to peer close, for the light was going fast. 

‘They’re sleeping,’ he said. 

‘They’ll be squalling soon enough. Lee, will you hitch up 
the rig and drive to my place for Liza? Tell her I need her 
here. If Tom’s still ther<^ tell him to mind tite place. If not. 
I’ll send him in the morning. And if Liza doesn’t want to 
come, tdi her we need a woman’s hand here and a woman’s, 
clear eyes. She’ll know what you mean.’ 

‘I’ll do it,’ said Lee. ‘Maybe we’re scaring each other, like 
two children in the dark.’ 

‘I’ve thought of that,' Samuel said. 'And, Lee, tell her I hurt 
my hand at the well head. Do not, for God’s sake, tell her how 
it happened.’ 

‘I’ll get some lamps lit and then I’ll go,’ said Lee. Tt will be 
a great relief to have her here.’ 

‘That it will, Lee. That it will. She’ll let some light into tin’s 
cellar hole.’ 

After Lee drove away in the dark, Samuel picked up a lamp 
in his left liand. He had to set it on the floor to turn the knob 
of the bedroom door. The room was in pitch-blackness, and 
the yellow lamplight streamed upward and did not light the 
bed. 

Cathy’s voice came strong and edged from the bed. ‘Shut the 
door. I do not want the light. Adam, go out! I want to be in 
the dark -alone.’ 

r Adam, said hoarsely, ‘I want to stay with you.’ 

‘I do not want you.’ 

'I will stay.' 

‘Then stay. But don’t talk any more. Please close the door 
¦ and take the lamp away.’ 

Samuel went back to the living-room. He put the lamp on 
the toble by the laundry basket and looked in on the small 
sleeping faces of the babies. Their ctcs were pinched shut and 
they sniffled a little in discomfort at the light. Samuel put his 
forefinger down and stroked the hot foreheads. One of the 
twins opened his mouth and yawned prodigiously and settled 
back to sleep. Samuel moved the lamp and then went to the 
front door and opened it and stepped outside. The evening 
star was so bright that it seemed to flare and crumple as it sank 
tov/ards the western mountains. The air was still and Samuel 

188 



could smell the,-day-heatcd sage. The night was very dark. 
Samuel started when he heard a voice speaking out of the 
blackness. 

‘How is she?’ 

‘Who is it?’ Samuel demanded. 

‘It’s me. Rabbit.’ The man emerged and took form in the 
light from the doorway. 

‘The mother, Rabbit? Oh, she’s fine.’ 

‘Lee said twins.’ 

‘That’s right -twin sons. You couldn’t want better. I guess 
IVIr Trask wiU tear the river up by the roots now. He’ll bring 
in a crop of candy canes.’ 

Samuel didn’t know %vhy he changed the subject. ‘Rabbit, 
do you know what we bor^ into today? A meteorite.’ 

‘What’s that, Mr Hamilton?’ 

‘A shooting star that fell a million years ago.’ 

‘You did? Well, think of that! How did you hurt your 
hand?’ 

‘¦I almost said on a shooting star.’ Samuel laughed. ‘But it 
wasn’t that interesting. I pinched it in the taclde.’ 

‘Bad?’ 

‘No, not bad.’ 

‘Two boys,’ said Rabbit. ‘My old lady wiU be j’ealous.’ 

‘Will you come inside and sit. Rabbit?’ 

‘No, no, thank you. I’ll get out to sleep. Morning seems to 
come earlier every' year I live.’ 

‘That it does. Rabbit. Good night then.’ 

Liza Hamilton arrived about four in the morning. Samuel 
was asleep in his chair, dreaming that he had gripped a red-hot 
bar of iron and could not let go. Liza awakened him and 
looked at his hand before she even glanced at the babies. While 
. she did well the things he had done in a lumbering, masculine 
way, she gave him his orders and packed him off. He was to 
get up this instant, saddle Doxology, and ride straight for King 
City. No matter what time it was, he must wake up that good- 
for-nothing doctor and get his hand treated. If it seemed all 
right he could go home and wait. And it was a criminal thing 
to leave your last-bom, and he little more than a baby him- 
self, sitting there by a hole in the ground with no one to care 
for him. It was a matter which might even engage the attention 
of the Lord God Himself. 

If Samuel craved realism and activity, he got it. She had him 
off the place by dawn. His hand was bandaged by eleven and 

189 


he was in his own chair at his own table by five in the after- 
noon, sizzling with fever, and Tom was boiling a hen to make 
chicken soup for him. 

For three days Samuel lay in bed, fighting the fever phan- 
toms and putting names to them too, before his great strength 
broke down the infection and drove it caterwauling aw'ay. 

Samuel looked up at Tom with clear eyes and said; ‘I’ll have 
to get up,’ tried it and sat wealdy back, chuckling - the sound 
he made when any force in the world defeated him. He had an 
idea that et-en when beaten he could steal a little victory by 
laughing at defeat. And Tom brought him chicken soup until 
he wanted to kill him. The lore has not died out of the w'orld, 
and you will still find people who believe that soup will cure 
any hurt or illness and is no bad thmg to have for the funeral 
either. 


I v 

Liza stayed away a week. She cleaned the Trask house from the 
top clear dow^n into the gram of tiie wooden floors. She 
washed everything slic could bend enough to get into a tub 
and sponged the rest. She put the babies on a working basis 
and noted with satisfaction that they howled most of the time 
and began to gam weight Lee she used like a slave since she 
didn’t quite believe in him. .Adam she ignored since she 
couldn’t use him for anything She did make him wash the 
y, windows and then did it again after he had finished. 

Liza sat with Cathy /ust enough to come to the conclusion 
.'that she wa.s a sensible girl who didn’t talk very much or try 
to teach her grandmother to suck eggs. She also checked her 
over and found that she was perfectly healthy, not injured and 
not sick, and that she would never nurse the twins. ‘And just 
as well too, she said. ‘ 1 lio.se great lummoxes would chew a 
little tiling like vou to the bone ’ She forgot that she was 
smaller than C.athy and had nursed cverv' one of her own 
children. 

On Saturday afternoon Liza checked her w'ork, left a list of 
instructions as long as her arm to cover every possibility from 
colic to an mroad of grease ants, packed her travelling basket, 
and had Iwk drive her home. 

She found her house a stable of filth and abomination and 
she set to cieanmg it with the violence and disgust of a Her- 
cules at labour. Samuel asked questions of her in flight. 

190 


How were the babies? 

They were fine, growing. 

How was Adam? 

Well, he moved around as if he was alive but he left ho evi- 
dence. The Lord in his wisdom gave money lo very curious i 
people, perhaps because thej-’d starve without. 

How was Mrs Trask? 

Quiet, lackadaisical, lilte most rich Eastern women (Liza had 
never known a rich Eastern woman), but on the other hand 
docile and respectful. ‘And it’s a strange thing,’ Liza said. ‘I 
can find no real fault with her save perhaps a touch of laziness, 
and I don’t like her very much. Maybe it’s that. scar. How did 
she get it?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Samuel. 

Liza levelled her forefinger like a pistol between his eyes, TII 
tell you something. Unbeknowst to herself, she’s put a spell on 
her husband. He moons around her like a sick duck. I don’t 
think he’s given the twins a thorough good look yet,’ 

Samuel waited until she went by again. He said, ‘Well, if 
she’s lazy and he’s moony, who’s going to take care of the 
sweet babies? Twin boys take a piece of looking after.’ 

Liza stopped in mid-swoop, drew a chair close to him, and 
sat resting her hands on her Imees. ‘Remember I’ve never held 
the truth h'ghtly if you don’t believe me,’ she said. 

‘I don’t think you could lie, dearie,’ he said, and she smiled, 
thinking it a compliment. 

‘Well, what I’m to- tell you might weigh a little heavy on 
your belief if you did not know that.’ 

‘Tell me.’ 

‘Samuel, 3'ou know that Chinese with his slanty eyes and his 
outlandish talk and that braid?’ 

‘Lee? Sure I Imow him.’ 

‘Well, wouldn’t you say off-hand he was a heathen?' 

‘I don’t know.’ , ^ „ , , , <-• 

‘Come now, Samuel, anybody won — But not. Sne 

straightened up. 

“What is he?’ 

She tapped his arm with an iron fm^. .ei 
- well up -well up, I say, when you dig it out ot mat crazy taa-t. 

Now what do you think of that?’ _ ^ ^ ^ . 

Samuel’s voice v/as unsteady with try in,, m 

terin. ‘Nol’hcsaid. 

‘And I say yes. Well now, who do.you . . 

191 . 



the twins? I wouldn’t trust a heathen from here to omega -but 
a Presbj’tcrian-he learned everything I told Wm.’ 

‘No wonder they’re taking on weight,’ said Samuel. ^ 

‘It’s a matter for praise and it’s a matter for prayer.’ 

‘We’ll do it too,’ said Samuel. ‘Both.’ 


V 

For a week Cathy rested and gathered her strength. On Satur- 
day of the second week of October she stayed in her bedroom 
all morning. Adam tried the door and found it locked. 

‘I’m busy,’ she called, and he went away. 

Putting her bureau in order, he thought, for he could hear 
her opening drawers and closing them. 

In the later afternoon Lee came to Adam where he sat on 
the stoop. ‘Missy say I go King Citv buy nursery bottle,’ he said 
uneasily. 

‘Well, do it then,’ said Adam. ‘She’s your mistress.’ 

‘Missy say not come back mebbe Monday. Take — ’ 

Cathy spoke calmly from the doorwaj-. ‘He hasn’t had a day' 
off for a long time. A rest would do him good.’ 

‘Of course,’ said Adam ’I iust didn’t think of it. Have a 
good time. If I need amthing I’ll get one of the carpenters.’ 

‘Men go home, Sunday ’ 

‘I’ll get the Indian. Lope/ will help.’ 

Lee felt Cathv’s eyes on him. ‘Lope/ dlunk. Find bottle 
5'^.;whisky.’ 

.^dam said pctulanth , Tm not helpless, Lee. Stop arguing.’ 
IVi- ¦ bee looked at C.athy standing in the doorvtay. He lowered 

is eyelids. ‘.Mebbe I come back late.’ he said, and he thought 
he saw two dark lines appear between her eyes and then dis- 
appear. He turneti awav. ‘Goo-by,’ he said. 

Cathy went back to her room as the evening came down. At 
seven-thirty Adam knocked I’ve got you some supper, dear. 
It’s not much.’ The door opened as though she had been 
standing waiting. She was dressed m her neat travelling dress, 
the jacket edged m black braid, black velvet lapels, and large 
jet buttons. On her head was a w-ide straw hat with a tiny 
crown; long jet-headed hatpins held it on. Adam’s mouth 
dropped open. 

She gave him no chance to speak. Tin going away now.’ 

'Cathy, what do you mean?’ 

‘I told you before.’ 


192 



‘You didn’t.’ 

‘You didn’t listen. It doesn’t matter,’ 

‘I don’t believe you.’ 

Hef voice was dead and metallic. ‘I don’t give a damn v/hat 
you believe. I’m going.’ 

‘The babies — ’ 

‘Throw them in one of your wells.’ 

He cried in panic, ‘Cathy, you’re sick. You can’t go -not 
from me -not from me.’ 

‘I can do anything to you. Any woman can do anything to 
you. You’re a fool.’ 

, The word got through his haze. Without warning, his hands 
reached for her shoulders and he thrust her backwards. As she 
staggered he. took the key from the inside of the door, slammed 
the door shut, and locked it. 

He stood panting, his ear close to the panel, and a hysterical 
sickness poisoned him. He could hear her moving quietly 
about. A drawer was opened, and the thought leaped m him — 
she’s going to stay. And then there was a little click he could not 
place. His ear was almost touching the door. 

Her voice came from so near that he jerked his head back. 
He heard richness in her voice. ‘Dear,’ she said softly, ‘I didn’t 
know you would take it so. I’m sorry, .^dam.’ 

His breath burst hoarsely out of his throat. His hand 
trembled, trying to turn the key, and it fell out on the floor 
after he had turned it. He pushed the dcor open. She stood 
three feet away. In her right hand she held his .44 Colt, and 
the black hole of the barrel pointed at him. He took a step to- 
wards her, saw that the hammer war. hack. 

She shot him. The hcsvy slug struck him in the shoulder 
' and flattened and tore out a pierce of hh shoulder-blade. The 
flash and roar '.mothered him, and he staggered back and feii 
to the floor. She moved sT-orvIy towards liira, cautiously, as she 
.might towards a wounded animal. He stared up into her v.e'.. 
which inspected him impersonally. She tossed the pistol or. me 
floor beside him and walked out of the house. 

He heard her steps on the porch, on the crisp dr.- od-r Irr r 
- on the path, and then he could hear her no more. .Co: --- 
monotonous sound that had been there all along v. r oor .— ¦ 
the twins, wanting their dinner. He had forgonen r. — 

; ¦ i, _ 


193 



CHAPTER 18 


I 

Horace Quinn was the new deputy sheriff appointed to 
look after tilings around tlic King City district. He complained 
that his new job took him away from his ranch too much. His 
wife complained even more, but the truth of tlie matter was 
that nothing much liad happened in a criminal ivay since 
Horace had been deputy. He had seen himself making a name 
for himself and running for sheriff. The sheriff was an im'-, 
portant officer. His . job was less flighty than that of district 
attorney, almost as permanent and dignified as superior court 
judge. Horace didn’t want to stay on the ranch all his life, 
and his wife had an urge to live in Salinas, where she had 
relatives. 

When the. rumours, repeated by the Indian and the carpen- ¦ 
ters, that Adam Trask had been shot reached Horace, he 
saddled up right away and left his wife to finish butchering the 
.pig he had killed that morning. 

Just north of the big sycamore tree where the Hester road 
turns off to the left, Horace met Julius Euskadi. Julius was ¦ 
trying to decide whether to go quail hunting or to King City, 
and catch the train to Salinas to shake some of the dust out of 
his britches. The Euskadis were well-to-do, handsome people 
;of Basque extraction. 

' Julius said, ‘If you’d come along with me, I’d go into 

alinas. Tlicy tell me that right next door to Jenny’s, two door 

rom the Long Green, there’s a new place called Faye’s. I 
heard it was pretty nice, run like San Francisco. They’ve got a 
piano player.' 

Horace rested his elbow on his saddle horn and stirred a fly 
from his horse’s shoulder with his rawhide quirt. ‘Some other 
time,’ he said. ‘I’ve got to look into something.’ 

‘You wouldn’t be going to Trask’s, would you?’ 

‘That’s right. Did you hear anything about it?’ 

‘Not to make any sense. I heard Mr Trask shot himself in 
the shoulder with a forty-four and then fired e\-erybody on the 
ranch. How do you go about shooting yourself in the shoulder 
with a forty-four, Horace?’ 

*I don’t know. Them Easterners are pretty clever. I thought 
Fd go up and find out. Didn’t his wife just have a baby?’ 

194 



•Twins, I heard; said Julius. ‘Maybe they shot Itim.’ 

‘One hold the gun and the otlicr puU tlie trigger? Hear any- 
thing els,e?’ 

‘All mixed up, Horace. Want some company . 

‘I’m not going to deputize you, Julius. Sheriff says the super- 
visors are. raising hell about the pay-roU. Hornby out in the 
Alisal deputized his great-aunt and kept her in posse three weeks 

iust before Easter.’ 

‘You’re fooling!’ 

‘No, I’m not. And you get no star.’ 

‘Hell, I don’t want to be a deputy. Just thought I’d ride along 
tvith youdor company. I’m curious.’ 

‘Me too. Glad to have you, Julius. I can always fling the oath 
around your neck if there’s any trouble. What do j'ou say the 
new place is called?’ 

‘Faye’s. Sacramento woman.’ 

‘They do things pretty nice in Sacramento,’ and Horace told 
how they did things in Sacramento as they rode along. 

It was a nice day to be riding. As they turned into the Sanchez 
draw they were cursing the bad himting in recent years. Three 
things'are never any good - farming, fishing, and hunting - com- 
pared to other years, that is. Julius was saying, ‘Christ, I wish 
they hadn’t killed off all the grizzly bears. In eightecn-eighty my 
grandfather killed one up by Plejto weighed eighteen hundred 
pounds.’ 

A silence came on them as they rode in under tlic oal'.3, a 
silence they took from the place itself. There was no sound, no 
movement. . 

‘I wonder if he fim’shed fixing up the old house,’ Horace said. 
• ‘Hell no. Rabbit Holman was working on it, and he told me 
Trask called them all in and fired them. He told them not to 
' comeback.’ 


‘They say Trask has got a pot of money.’ 

_ ‘I guess he’s well fixed, all right,’ said Julius. ‘Sam Hamilton 
IS smkmg four wells -if he. didn’t get fired too.’ 

‘How is Mr Hamilton? I ought to go up to sec him.’ 

‘He’s fine. Full of heUas ever.’ 

Til have to go up and pay him a visit,’ said Horace. 

Lee caine out on the stoop to meet them. 

^race said, ‘HeUo, Ching Chong. Bossy man here?’ 

He sick,’ Lee said. 

Td like to see him.’ 

‘No see. He sick.’ 


195 



‘That’s enough of that,’ said Horace. ‘Tell him Deputy Sheriff 

Quinn wants to see him.’ ^ 

Lee disappeared, and in a moment he was back. ‘You come, 

¦ j said. ‘I take horsy.’ 

Adam lay in the four-poster bed where the twins had been 
arn. He was propped high with pillows, and a mound of home- 
evised bandages covered his left breast and shoulder. The room 
Kked of Hall’s Cream Salve, 

Horace said later to his wife, ‘.^nd if you e\ er saw death still 
reatlting, there it was.’ 

Adam’s checks hugged the bone and puUed the skin of his 
ose tight and skinny. His eyes seemed to bulge out of his head 
nd to take up tlie whole upper part of his face, and they were 
liiny with sickness, tense and myopic. His bony right liand 
ncaded a fistful of coverlet. 

Horace said, ‘Howdy, .Mr Trask. Heard you got hurt.’ He 
lauscd, waiting for an answer He went on, ‘Just tliought I’d 
Irop around and sec how vou were doing. How’d it happen?’ 

A look of transparent eagerness came over Adam’s face. He 
hifted slightly in the bed. 

‘If it hurts to talk \ou can whisper,’ Horace added helpfully. 
‘Only when I breathe deep,' .^dam said softly. ‘I was cleaning 
ny gun and it went off ‘ 

Horace glanced at Julius and then back. .\dam saw the look 
ind a httlc coUmr of embarrassment rose in his cheeks. 

‘Happens all the time,’ said Horace. ‘Got the gun around?’ 

'I tliink Lee pul if awav.’ 

Horace stepped to the door. ‘Hev there, Ching Chong, bring 
:he pistol.’ 

In a moment Lee psiked the gun butt-first through the door. 
Horace looked at it, swung the cylinder out, poked the cartridges 
)ut, and smelk\i t!ic empt\ hrass cylinder of the one empty 
ihcll, ‘There s beti^r stuxuing cleaning the damn things than 
xiinling them. I 11 ha\e to make a report to the county, Mr 
Trask. I won t t.ike up much. s>f \our ume. You were cleaning ' 
he barrel, maybe with a rod, and the gun went off and hit you 
n the shoulder 

‘That’s right, sir.’ .Adam 'tud ,^ulck!^. 

.And, cleaning it, you hadn t "^wung out the cylinder^* 

‘That’s right.’ 

‘And you were piikmg the rod in and out with the barrel 
pointed tenvards you with the hammer cocked 
Adam’s breath rasped in a gmek iniako, 

196 



Horace went on, ‘And it must have blowcd the rod rJf'lit 
through you and took off your left hand too.’ Horacc’n pale aiiri- 
washed eyes never left Adam’s face. He said kindly, 'What h.ip- 
pened, Mr Trask? Tell me what happened.’ 

‘I tell you truly it was an accident, sir.’ . 

‘Now you wouldn’t have me write a report like I just .said. 
The sheriff would think I was crazy. What happened?’ 

‘Well, I’m not very used to guns. Maybe it wasn’t just like 
that, but I was cleaning it and it went off.’ 

There was a whistle in Horace’s nose. He had to breathe 
through his mouth to stop it. He moved slowly up from the foot 
of the bed, nearer to Adam’s head and staring eyes. ‘You came 
from the ^stnot very long ago, didn’t you, Mr Trask?’ 

‘That’s right. Connecticut.’ 

‘I guess people don’t use guns very much there any more.’ 
‘Not much.’ 

‘Little hunting?’ 

‘Some.’’ 

‘So you’d be more used to a shotgun?’ 

‘That’s right. But I never hunted much.’ 

‘I guess you didn’t hardly use a pistol at all, so you didn’t 
know how to handle it.’ 

‘That’s right,’ Adam said eagerly. ‘Hardly anybody there has 
, a pistol.’ 

' 'So when you came here you bought that forty-four because 
everybody out here has a pistol and you were going to learn how 
to use it.’ 

‘Well, ,I thought it might be a good thing to learn.’ 

Julius Euskadi stood tensely, his face and body receptive, 
listening but uncommunicative. 

Horace sighed and looked away from Adam. His eyes brushed 
over and past Julius and came back to his hands. He laid the 
gun on, the bureau and carefully, lined the brass and lead cart- 
ridges beside it. ‘You know,’ he said, ‘I’ve only been a deputy a 
little while. I thought I was going to have some fun with it and 
maybe in a few years run for sheriff. I haven’t got the guts for 
it. It isn’t any fun to me.’ 

Adam watched him nervously. 

I don t think anybod^s ever been afraid of me before— mad 
at me, yes -but not afraid. It’s a mean thing, makes me feel 
mean.’ 

Julius said irritably, ‘Get to it. You can’t resign right this 
nunute.’ 


197 



‘The hell I can’t- if I want to. All right! Mr Trask, you 
sensed in the United States Cavalry. The weapons of tlic caralry 
arc carbines and pistols. You — ’ He stopped and swaUowed. 
‘What happened, h\x Trask?’ 

Adam’s eyes seemed to grow larger, and they were moist and 
edged with red. ‘It was an accident,’ he whispered. 

‘Anybody see it? Was your wife with you when it happened?’ 
Adam did not reply, and Horace saw that his eyes were 
closed. ‘Mr Trask,’ he said. ‘I know you're a sick man. I’m try- 
ing to make it as easy on you as I can. Why don’t you rest how 
while I have a talk with j'our wife'’ He waited a moment and 
then turned to the doorway, where Lee still stood. 'Ching 
Chong, tell Missy I would admire to talk to her a fav minutes.’ 
Lee did not reply. 

Adam spoke without opening his eyes. ‘My wife is away on a 
visit.’ 

'She wasn't here uhen it happened '’ Horace glanced at Julius 
and saw a curious expression on Juliu.s's lips. The corners of liis 
mouth were turned siiglnh up m a sardonic smile. Horace 
thought quickv, ’He’s ahead ot me. He’d make a good sheriff.’ 
‘Say,’ he said, ‘ttiai’s kind of interesting. Your wife had a baby — 
two babies - tu ¦> neeks ago, .ind now she's gone on a visit. Did 
she take the bahics \uth her' I thought I heard them a little 
while ago,’ Horace leaned over the bed and touched the back of' 
Adam’s clenched right hand, ‘I hate this, but I can’t stop now. 
Tr,isk'’ he s.iij louJlv, ‘I want vou to tell me what happened. 
This isn t n'Wins’ss, This is the law. Xow, damn it, you open 
vour eves and tell me or, hv t hrist. I’ll take you in to the sheriff 
even if vou art hurt ’ 

Adam opened his eves, and thee were blank like a sleep- 
walker s eves, .ynd his voise earns out without rise or fall, with- 
out emphasis, and without an\ emotion. It was as though he 
pronounced per[e,tl\ words in a language he did not under- 
stand. 

‘My wife went awav,’ he said. 

‘Where did she gO '’ 

‘I don’t know,’ 

‘What do you meun ' ’ 

‘I don’t know where she went.' 

Julius broke in, speaking for the first time, ‘Why did she 
go?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

Horace said angrily. ’You watch it. Trask. You’re playing 

19S 



pretty close to the edge and I don’t like what I’m thinking. You'; 
must know why she went away.’ 

‘I don’t know why she went.’ 

‘Was she sick? Did she act strange?’ 

‘No.’ 

Horace turned. ‘Ching Chong, do you know anything about 
this?’ 

‘I go King City Satdy. Come back mebbe twelve night. Find 
Missy Tlask on floor.’ 

‘So you weren’t here when it happened ?’ 

‘No, ma’am.’ 

‘All right, Trask, I’ll have to get back to you. Open up that 
blind a little, Ching Chong, so I can see. There, that’s better. 
Now I’m going to do it your way first until I can’t any more. 
Your wife went away. Did she shoot you?’ 

‘It was an accident.’ 

‘All right, an accident, but was the gun in her hand?’ 

‘It was an accident.’ 

‘You don’t make it very easy. But let’s say she went away and 
we have to find her -see? - like a kid’s game. You’re making it 
that way. How long have you been married?’ 

‘Nearly a year.’ 

‘What was her name before you married her?’ 

- There was a long pause, and then Adam said softly, ‘I won’t 
tell. I promised.’ 

. ‘Now you watch it. Where did she come from?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Mr Trasls, you’re talking yourself right into the county jail. 
Let’s have a description. How tall was she?’ 

Adam’s eyes gleamed. ‘Not tall - little and delicate.’ 

‘That’s just fine. What colour hair? Eyes?’ 

‘She was beautiful.’ 

‘Was.’ 

‘Is.’ 

‘Any scars?’ 

‘Oh, God, no. Yes - a scar on her forehead.’ 

.‘You don’t Icnow her name, where she came from, where she 
went, and you can’t describe her. And you think I’m a fool.’ 

Adam said, ‘She had a secret. I promised I wouldn’t ask her. 
She was afraid for someone.’ And without warning Adam began 
to cry. His vvhole body shook, and his breath made little sounds. 
It was hopeless crying. 

Horace felt misery rising in him. ‘Come on in the other room, 

199 



Julius,’ he said, and led the tvay into the living-room. ‘All right, 

Julius, tell me what you think. Is he crazy?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Did he kill her?’ 

‘That’s what jumped into my mind.’ 

‘Mine too,’ said Horace. 'My God!’ He hurried into the bed- 
room and came back with the pistol and the shells. ‘I forgot, 
them,’ he apologized. ‘I won’t last long in this job.’ 

Julius asked, ‘What arc you going to do ? ’ 

‘Well, I tliiiak it’s be3'ond me. I told you I wouldn’t put you 
on the pay-roll, but hold up your right hand.’ 

‘I don’t want to get sworn in, Horace. I want to go to Salinas.’ 
‘You don’t have any chance, Julius. I’ll have to arrest you if 
you don’t get your goddam hand up.’ 

Julius reluctantly put up his hand and disgustedly repeated 
the oath. ‘And tliat’s what I get for keeping you company,’ he 
said. ‘My father will skin me alive. All right, what do we do 
now?’ 

Horace said, ‘I’m going to run to papa. I need the sheriff. I’d 
:ake Trask in, but I don’t want to move him. You’ve got to stay, 
fulius. I’m sorry'. Have vou got a gun?’ 

‘Hell, no.’ 

‘VC’cll, take this one, and take my star.’ He unpinned it from 
bis shirt and held it out. 

‘How long do you think you’ll be gone?’ 

‘Not any longer than I can help. Did you ever see Mrs Trask, 
Julius?’ 

‘N>', I didJl’t.' 

‘N'euhir did I. .‘Viid I’w got to tell the sheriff that Trask 
doosn t know her name or anvthing. And she's not very big and 
she is lieautif'.il. That’s one hell of a description! I think I’ll 
resign before I tell the sheniT, because he’s sure as hell going to 
fire me afterwards. Do \ou think he killed her?’ 

‘How the hell do I know?' 

‘Don’t get mad.’ 

Julius picked up the gun and put the cartridges back in the 
cy'lindcr and balanced it in his hand. ‘You want an idea, Hor- 
ace?’ 

‘Don’t it look like I need one?’ 

Well, Sam Hamilton knew her -he took the babies. Rabbit 
says. And Ivlrs Hamilton took care of her. W’hy don’t y'ou ride 
out there on your way' and find out what she really looked 
like.’ 


200 



‘I think maybe you better keep that star/ said rionicc. "f'lmt'fi 
good. I’ll get going.’ 

‘You want me to look around?’ 

‘I want j'ou just to see that he doesn’t get away -or hun him- 
self. Understand? Take care of yourself.’ 

II 

About midnight Horace got on a freight train in King City. He 
sat up in the cab witit the engineer, and he was in Salinas the 
first thing in the morning. Salinas was the county scat, and it 
was a fast-growing town. Its population was due to cross the two 
thousand mark any time. It was the biggest town between San 
Jose and- San Luis Obispo, and everyone felt tliat a brilliant 
future was in store for it. 

Horace tralked up from the Southern Pacific Depot and 
stopped in the Chop House for breakfast. He didn’t want to get 
the sheriff out so early and rouse ill-will when it wasn’t neces- 
sary. In the Chop House he ran into young Will Hamilton, 
looking pretty prosperous in a salt-and-pcpper business suit. 

. Horace sat down at the table with him. ‘How arc you. Will?' 
,‘Oh, prettj' good.’ 

‘Up here on business?’ 

‘Well, yes, I do have a little deal on.' 

‘You might let me in on somctliing some time.’ Horace felt 
strange talking like this to such a young man, but Will Hamil- 
ton had an axtra of success about him. Eveiybod}' knew he was 
going to be a very influential man in the county. Some people 
exude their futures, good or bad. 

. ‘I’ll do that, Horace. I thought the ranch took all your time.’ 

- 'I could be persuaded to rent it if anjuhing turned up.’ 

Will leaned over the table. ‘You know, Horace, our part of the 
county has been pretty much left out. Did you ever tliink of 
running for office?’ 

‘What do j’ou mean?’ 

Well, you’re a deputy -did you ever think of running for 
sheriff?’ • 

‘Why, no, I didn’t.’ 

Well, you think about it. Just keep it under your hat. FlI look 
you up in a couple of weeks and wc’ll tall: about it. But keep it 
under your hat.’ 

we’ve got an avrfful good 


201 



‘I know.' That’s got nothing to do with it. King City hasn’t 
got a single cottnty officer - you see?’ 

‘I see. I’ll think about it. Oh, by the way I stopped by and saw 
your father and mother yesterday.’ 

Will’s face lighted up. ‘You did? How were they?’ 

‘Just line. You know, your father is a real comical genius.’ 

Will chuckled. ‘He made us laugh all the rime we were grotv- 
ing up.’ 

‘But he’s a smart man too, Will. He showed me a new kind of 
windmill he’s invented - goddamdesi thing vou ever saw.’ 

‘Oh, Lord ! ’ said Will, ‘here come the patent attorneys again ! ’ 
‘But this is good,’ said Horace. 

‘They’re all good. And the only people who make any money 
are the patent lawyers. Drives my mother crazy.’ 

‘I guess you’ve got a point tliere.' 

Will said, ‘The only way to make any money is to sell some- 
thing somebody else makes.’ 

‘You’ve got a point there Will, but this is the goddamdest 
vindmill you ever saw.’ 

‘He took vou in. did he, Horace?’ 

*I guess he did. But vou uouldn't want him to change, would 

.’OU?’ 

‘Oh, Lord, no*' muJ Will 'You think about what I said,’ 

‘All right,’ 

‘And keep It under vour hat,’ said Will. 

The sluriffs lob was not an easy one. and that county which, 
•Hit of the grab bag of popular elections, pulled a good sheriff 
a as liKk'v It v.is a coinplicaied position. The obvious duties of ' 
the sheriff - enfors ing the law and keeping the peace — were far 
from the mi'- t important ones It was true that the sheriff repre- 
sented .irmed lone in the lO'intv, hut in a community seething 
with iik1i\ idu.ils a harsh or stupid sheritf did not last long. 
There were w.Uer rights, boundart disputes, astray arguments, 
domestic relations, paicrnuv matters -all to be settled without 
force of arms tfnlv w hen evcrvthing else failed did a good 
sheriff make an arn.'st. 1 he Ix-st sheriff was not the best fighter 
but the best diplomat .Xnd .Monterey County liad a good one. 
He had a bnlhani gift for mm, ling his own businc.ss. 

Horace went into the slierifl’s office in the old county jail 
about ten minutes after nine. The sheriff shtxik hands and dis-, 
cussed the weather and tlie crops until Horace was ready to get 
dowm to business. 

NM'Cll, sir, Horace said tinaiiv, I had to come up to get vour" 


202 



idvice.’ And he told his storj' in great detail -what everybody ' 
tad said and how they looked and what time it was - everj'thing. 

After a few moments the sheriff closed his eyes and laced his 
Bngers together. He punctuated the account occasionally by 
opening his eyes, but he made no comment. 

‘Well, there I was on a limb,’ Horace said. ‘I couldn’t find out - 
what happened. I couldn’t even find out what the woman looked 
like. It was Julius Euskadi got the idea I should go to see Sam 
Hamilton.’ 

The sheriff stirred, crossed his legs, and inspected the job. 
‘You think he killed her.’ 

‘Weil, I did. But Mr Hamilton kind of talked me out of it. He 
says Trask hasn’t got it in him to kill anybody.’ 

‘Everybody’s got it in him,’ the sheriff said. ‘You just find his 
trigger and anybody will go off.’ 

‘Mr Hamilton told me some funny things about her. You 
know, when he was taking her babies she hit him on the hand. 
You ought to see the hand, like a wolf got him.’ 

.‘Did Sam give you a description?’ 

‘He did, and his wife did.’ Horace took a piece of paper from 
his pocket and read a detailed description of Cathy. Between the 
two of them the Hamiltons knew pretty much everything physi- 
cal there was to know about Cathy. 

When Horace finished, the sheriff sighed. ‘They both agreed 
about the scar?’ 

‘Yes, they did. And both of them remarked about how some- 
times it was darker titan other times.’ 

- The sheriff closed his eyes again and he leaned back in his 
chair. Suddenly he straightened up, opened a drawer of his roll- 
top desk, and took out a pint of whisky. ‘Have a drink,’ he said. 

‘Don’t mind if I do. Here’s looking at you.’ Horace wiped his 
mouth arid handed back the pint. ‘Got any ideas?’ he asked. 

The sheriff took three big swallows of whisky, corked the pint, 
and put it back in the drawer before he replied. ‘We’ve got a 
pretty well-run county',’ he said. ‘I get along with the constables, 
give them a hand when they need it, and they help me out when 
I need it. You take a town growing lilte Salinas, and strangers in 
and out all the time -could have trouble if we didn’t watch it 
pretty close. My office gets along fine with the local people.’ He 
looked Horace in the eye. ‘Don’t get restless. I’m not making a 
speech. I just want to tell you how it is. We don’t drive people. 
We’ve got to live with them.’ 

Did I do something wrong?’' 

203 


•No, you didn’t, Horace. You did just right. If you hadn’t 
coinc to town or if you had brought Mr Trask in, we d of been 
in one heU of a mess. Now hold on. I’m going to tell you — ’ 
‘I’m listening,’ said Horace. 

‘Over across the tracks down by Chinatown there’s a row of 
whorehouses.’ 

‘I know that.’ 

‘Everybody knows it. If we dosed them up they’d just move. 
The people want those houses. We keep an eye on them so' not 
much bad happens. And the people that run those houses keep 
in touch with us. I’ve picked up some wanted men from tips I 
got down there.’ 

Horace said, ‘Julius told me — ’ > 

‘Now wait a minute. Let me get all this said so we won’t have 
to go back over it. About diree months ago a fine-looking woman 
came in to see me. She wanted to open a house here and wanted 
to do it right. Came from Sacramento. Ran a place there. She 
had letters from some pretty important people- straight record 
- never had any trouble. A pretty damn good citizen.’ 

‘Julius told me. Name of i*aye.’ 

‘That’s right. ’K'ell, she opened a nice place, quiet, well run. It 
was about time old Jenny and the Nigger had some competition. 
They were mad as b.ell about it, but I told them just what I 
told you. It’s about time they had some competition.’ 

‘There’s a piano player,’ 

‘Yes, there is. Good one too - blind fella. Say, are you going to 
let me tell this?' 

‘I’m sorry,’ said Horace. 

‘That's all right. I know I’m slow, but I’m thorough. Any- 
ways, Faye turned out to be just what she looks like, a good 
solid citizen. Now there’s one thing a good quiet whorehouse is 
more scared of than anything else. Take a flighty randy girl runs 
off from home and goes in a house. Her old man finds her and 
he begins to shovel up hell. Then the churches get into it, and 
the women, and pretty soon iliat whorehouse has got a bad name 
and we’ve got to dose it up. You understand?’ 

‘Yeah!’ Horace said softly. 

Now don t get ahead of me. I hate to tell something you 
already thought out. Faye sent me a note Sunday night. She’s 
got a girl and she can’t make much out of her. What puzzles 
Faye is that this kid looks like a runaways girl except she’s a 
goddam good whore. She knows all the answers and all the 
tricks. I went down and looked her over. She told me the usual 

204 



bull, but I can’t find a thing wrong with her. She’s of age and . 
nobody’s made a complaint.’ He spread his hands. ‘Well, there 
it is. What do we do about it?’ 

‘You’re pretty sure it’s Airs Trask?’ 

The sheriff said, ‘Wide-set eyes, yellow hair, and a scar on her 
forehead, and she came in Sunday afternoon.’ 

Adam’s weeping face was in Horace’s mind. ‘God all mighty! 
Sheriff, you got to get soroebodj' else to tell him. I’ll quit before 
Ido.’ 

The sheriff gazed into space. ‘You say he didn’t even know 
her name, where she came from. She really bull-shitted him, 
didn’t she?’ 

. ‘The poor bastard,’ Horace said. ‘The poor bastard is in love 
with her. No, by God, somebody else has got to tell him. I 
won’t.’ 

The sheriff stood up. ‘Let’s go down to the Chop House and 
get a cup of coffee.’ 

They walked along tlie street in silence for a while. ‘Horace,’ 
the sheriff said, ‘if I told some of the things I know, this whole 
goddam county would go up in smoke.’ 

‘I guess that’s right.’ 

‘You said she had twins?’ 

‘Yeah, twin boys.’ 

‘You listen , to me, Horace. There’s only three people in the 
world that knows -her and you and me. I’m going to warn her 
that if she ever tells I’ll brush her arse out of this county so fast 
it’ll burn. And, Horace - if you should ever get an itchy tongue, 
before you tell anybody, even your wife, why, you think about 
those little boys finding out their mother is a whore.’ 

Ill 

Adam sat in his chair under the big oak tree. His left arm was 
expertly bandaged against his side so that he could not move his 
shoulder. Lee came out carrying the laundry basket. He set it on 
the ground beside Adam and went back inside. 

The twins were awake, and they both looked blindly and 
earnestly up at the wind-moved leaves of the oak tree. A dry 
oak leaf came whirling dov/n and landed in the basket. Adam 
leaned over and picked it out. 

He didn't hear Samuel’s horse until it was almost upon him, 
but Lee had seen him coming. He brought a chair out and led 
Doxology away towards the shed. 

205 



Samuel sat down quietly; and he didn’t trouble Adam by look- 
ing at him too much, and he didn’t trouble him by not looking 
at him. The wind freshened in the tree-tops and a fringe of it 
ruffled Samuel’s hair. T thought I’d better get back to the wells/ 
Samuel said softly. _ 

Adam’s voice had gone rusty from lack of use. ‘No/ he said, ‘I 
don’t want any wells. I’ll pay you for the work you did.’ 

Samuel leaned over the basket and put his finger against the 
small palm of one of the twins and the fingers closed and held 
on.- ‘I guess the last bad habit a man will give up is advising.’ . 
T don’t want advice.’ 

‘Nobody does. It’s a giver’s present. Go through the motions, 
Adam.’ 

‘What motions?’ 

'Act out being alive like a play. .\nd after a while, a long 
while, it will be true.’ 

‘Why should 1?’ Adam asked. 

Samuel was looking at the wins. ‘You’re going to pass some- 
thing down, no matter what you do or if you do nothing. Even 
if you let yourself go fallow, the weeds will grow and the 
brambles. Something will grow.' 

Adam d id not answer, and Samuel stood up. 'I’ll be back/ he 
said. ‘I’ll be back again and again. Go through the motions, 
Adam.’ 

In the back of tb.e shed Lee held Doxology while Sam 
mounted. ‘There gsK-s your bookstore, Lee/ he said. 

‘Oh, well/ said the Chinese, ‘maybe I didn’t want it much, 

answay.’ 


CHAPTER 19 

I 

A NEW country seems to follow a pattern. First come the 
openers, strong and brave and rather childlike. They can take 
care of thcmsclr'cs in a wilderness, but tJiey arc naive and hclpi- 
Icss against men, and perhaps that is why they went out in the 
first place. When the rough edges arc worn off the new land, ' 
business men and lawyers come in to help with the develop- 
ment — to solve problems of ownership, usually fay removing tlie 
temptations to tliemselvcs. And finally comes culture, which is 

206 



entertainment, relaxation, transport out of the pain of living. 
And culture can be on any level, and is. 

The chturch and the whorehouse arrived in the Far West 
simultaneously. And each would have been horrified to think it 
was a different facet of the same thing. But surely they were 
both intended to accomplish the same thing: the singing, the 
devotion, the poetry of tlie churches took a man out of his bleak- 
ness for a time, and so did the brothels. The sectarian Churches 
came in swinging, cocky and loud and confident.- Ignoring the 
laws of debt and repayment, they built churches which, couldn’t 
be paid for in a hundred years. The sects fought evil, true 
enough, but they also fought each other with a fine lustiness. 
They fought at Ae turn of a doctrine. Each happily believed all 
the others were bound for heU in a basket. And each for all its 
bumptiousness brought with it the same thing : the Scripture on 
which our ethics, our art and poctrj’', and our relationships are 
built. It took a smart man to know where the difference lay be- 
tween the sects, but anyone could see what they had in common. 
And they brought music— maybe not the best, but the form and 
sense of it. And they brought conscience, or, rather, nudged the 
dozing conscience. They were not pure, but they had a poten- 
tial of piu:ity, like a soiled white shirt. And any man could make 
something pretty fine of it witliin himself. True enough, the 
Reverend Billing, when they caught up with him, turned out to 
be a thief, an adulterer, a libertine, and a zoophilist, but that 
didn’t change the fact that he had communicated some good 
things to a great number of receptive people. Billing went to 
jail, but no one ever arrested the good things he had released. 
And it doesn’t matter much that his motive was impure. He 
used good material and some of it stuck. I use Billing only as 
an outrageous example. The honest preachers had energy and 
go. They fought the devil, no holds barred, boots and eye- 
gouging permitted. You might get the idea that they howled 
truth and beauty the way a seal bites out the National Anthem 
on a row of circus horns. But some of the truth and beauty re- 
mained, and the anthem was recognizable. The sects did more 
than this, though. They built the structure of social life in the 
Salmas -Valley. The church supper is the grandfather of the 
country club, just as the Thursday poetry reading in the base- 
ment under the vestry sired the little theatre. 

• While the .churches, bringing the sweet smell of piety for the 
soul, came in prancing and farting like brewery horses in bock- 
beer time, the sister evangelism, with release ^nd joy for the 

207 



body, crept in silently and greyly, with its head bowed and its 
face covered. 

You may have seen the spangled palaces of sin and fancy 
dancing in the false West of the movies, and maybe some of 
them existed — but not in the Salinas Valley. The brothels were 
quiet, orderly, and circumspect Indeed, if after hearing the 
ecstatic shrieks of climactic conversion against the thumping 
beat of the melodeon you had stood under the window of a. 
whorehouse and listened to the low decorous voices, you would 
have been likely to confuse the identities of the tw'O ministries.. 
The brothel was accepted while it was not admitted. 

I will tell you about the solemn courts of love in Salinas. They 
were about the same in other towns, but the Salinas Row has a 
pertinence to this telling. 

You walked west on .Mam .Street until it bent. That’s where 
Castroville Street crossed .Main. Castroville Street is now called 
Market Street. God knows why. Streets used to be named for 
the place they aimed at Thus Castroville Street, if you followed 
it nine miles, brought \au to Castroville, Alisal Street to Alisal, 
and so forth. 

Anjway, when \ou came to Castroville Street you turned 
right. Two blocks down, the Southern Pacific tracks cut diagon- 
ally across the street on their way south, and a street crossed 
Castroville Street from east to west, .“^nd for the life of me I 
cannot remember the name of that street. If you turned left on 
that street and crossed the tracks you were in Cliinatown. If you 
turned right vou were on the Row. 

h wa-. a bl.ack 'dohe street, deep shining mud in winter and 
liard as rutted iron m '¦ummer. In the spring ilie tall grass grew 
along It odes -Wiki oats .ind malKiw weeds and yellow mustard 
mixed in, In iSie airK morning the sparrows slirieked over the 
horse manure in the street. 

Do you remember hearing that, old men? And do you re- 
member, how an e.i'.lerU hreeve brought odours in from Cllina- 
town, rousting pork and punk and black tobacco and yen shi? 
And do ymi rcmemlx-r the deep blatting stroke of the great gong 
in the Joss House, ami how its tone hung in the air so long? 

Remember, too, the little houses, unpainted, unrepaired? They 
seemed very small, and they tried to efface themselves in outside 
neglect, and the u'lld overgrown front yards tried to hide them 
from the street. Remember how the blinds w'cre always drawn 
with little lines of yellow light around tlicir edges? You could 
hear only a murmur from within. Then the front door would 

208 



open to admit a country boy, and you’d hear laughter and per- 
haps the soft sentimental tone of an' open-face piano with a 
piece of toilet chain across the strings, and then the door would 
close it off again. 

Then you might hear horses’ hoofs on the dirt street, and Pet 
Bulene would drive his hack up in front, and maybe four or 
five portly men would get out -great men, rich or official, 
bankers maybe, or the court-house gang. And Pet would drive 
round the comer and settle down in his hack to wait for them. 
Big cats would ripple across the street to disappear in the tall 
grass. 

And then -remember? - the train whistle and the boring light 
and a freight from King City would go stomping across Castro- 
ville Street and into Salinas and you could hear it sighing at 
the' station. Remember? 

' Every town has its celebrated madams, eternal women to be 
sentimentalized down the years. There is something very attrac- 
tive to men about a madam. She combines the brains of a busi- 
ness man, the toughness of a prize-fighter, the warmth of a 
companion, the humour of a tragedian. Myths collect round her, 
and, oddly enough, not voluptuous myths. The stories remem- 
bered and repeated about a madam cover every field But the 
bedroom. Remembering, her old customers picture her as phil- 
anthropist, medical authority, bouncer, and poetess of the bodily 
emotions without being involved with them. 

For a number of years Salinas had sheltered two of these 
treasures : Jenny, sometimes called Fartin’ Jenny, and the Nig- 
ger, who owned and operated the Long Green. Jenny was a good 
companion, a keeper of secrets, a giver of secret loans. There is 
a whole literature of stories about Jenny in Salinas. 

The Nigger was a handsome, hustere wornan with snow-white 
hair and a dark and awful dignity. Her brown eyes, brooding 
deep in her skull, looked out on an ugly world with philosophic 
sorrow. She conducted her house like a cathedral dedicated to a 
sad but erect Priapus. If you wanted a good laugh and a poke in 
the ribs, you went to Jenn5r’s and got your money’s worth; but if 
the sweet world-sadness close to tears crept out of your immut- 
table loneliness, the Long Green was your place. When you came 
out of there you felt that something pretty stern and import^t 
had happened. It was no jump in the hay. The dark beautiful 
eyes of the Nigger stayed with you for days. 

When Faye came down from Sacramento and opened her 
house there was a flmry of animosity from the two incumbents. 

209 . 



body, crept in silently and greyly, with its head bowed and its 

face covered. , . - ' 

You may have seen tlie spangled palaces of sm and fancy' 
dancing in the false West of the moyi^, and maybe some of 
them existed — but not ih the Salinas Valley. The brothels were 
quiet, orderly, and circumspect. Indeed, if after hiring the 
ecstatic shrieks of climactic conversion against the ^thumping 
beat of the melodeon you had stood undCT the, window of a 
whorehouse and listened to the low decorous voices, you would 
have been liltely to confuse the identities of the two ministries. 
The brothel was accepted while it was not admitted. ¦ 

. I will tell you about tlie solemn courts of love in Salinas. They 
were about the same in other towns, but the Salinas Row has a 
pertinence to this telling. 

You walked west on Main Street until it bent. That’s where 
Castroville Street crossed Main. Castroville Street is now called 
. Market Street. God knows why. Streets used to be n^ed for 
the place they aimed at. Thus Castroville Street, if you followed 
it nine miles, brought you to Castroville, Alisal Street to Alisal, 
and so forth. 

5 Anjtvay, when you came to Castroville Street you turned 
right. Two blocks down, the Southern, Pacific tracks cut diagon- 
ally across the street on their way south, and a street crossed 
Castroville Street from east to west. And for the life of me I 
cannot remember the name of that street. If you turned left on 
that street and crossed the tracks you were in Chinatown. If you 
turned right you were on the Row. 

It was a black ’dobe street, deep shining mud in winter and 
liard as rutted iron in summer. In the spring the tall grass grew 
along it sides - wild oats and mallow weeds and yellow' mustard 
mixed in. In the early morning the sparrows shrieked over the 
horse manure in the street. 

Do j'ou remember hearing that, old men? And, do you re- 
member, how an easterly breeze brought odours in .from China- 
town, roasting pork and 'punk and black tobacco and yen shi? 
And do you remember the deep blatting stroke of the great gong 
in the Joss House, and how its tone hung in the air so long? 

Remember, too, the little houses, unpainted, unrepaired? They 
seemed verj’ small, and they tried to efface themselves in outside 
neglect, and the wild overgrown- front yards tried to hide them 
from the street. Remember how the blinds were always drawn 
with little lines of yellow light around tlicir edges? You could 
hear only a murmur from within. Then the front door w’ould 

208 



open to admit a coimtry boy, and you’d hear kughter and per- 
haps the soft sentimental tone of an open-face piano 'with a 
piece of toilet chain across the strings^ and then the door would 
close it ofif again. 

Then you might hear horses’ hoofs on the dirt street, and Pet 
Bulene would drive his hack up in front, and maybe four or 
five portly men would get out- great men, rich or ofiBcial, 
bankers maybe, or the court-house gang. And Pet would drive 
round the comer and settle down in his hack to wait for them. 
Big cats would ripple across the street to disappear in the tall 
grass. 

And then -remember? - the train whistle and the boring light 
and a freight from King City would go stomping across Castro- 
ville Street and into Salinas and you could hear it sighing at 
the station. Remember? 

Every town has its celebrated madams, eternal women to be 
sentimentalized down the years. There is something very attrac- 
tive to men about a madam. She combines the brains of a busi- 
ness man, the toughness of a prize-fighter, the warmth of a 
companion, the humour of a tragedian. Myths collect round her, 
and, oddly enough, not voluptuous myths. The stories remem- 
bered and repeated about a madam cover every field but the 
bedroom. Remembering, her old customers pictirre her as phil- 
anthropist, medical authority, bouncer, and poetess of the bodily 
emotions without being involved with them. 

For a number of years Salinas had sheltered two of these 
treasures : Jenny, sometimes called Fartin’ Jenny, and the Nig- 
ger, who owned and operated the Long Green. Jenny was a good 
companion, a keeper of secrets, a giver of secret loans. There is 
a whole literature of stories about Jenny in Salinas. 

The Nigger was a handsome, austere woman with snow-white 
hair and a dark and awful dignity. Her brown eyes, brooding 
deep in her skull, looked out on an ugly world with philosophic 
sorrow. She conducted her house like a cathedral dedicated to a 
sad but erect Priapus. If you wanted a good laugh and a poke in 
the ribs, you went to Jeiuiy’s and got your money’s worth ; but if 
the sweet world-sadness close to tears crept out of your immut- 
table loneliness, the Long Green was your place. When you came 
out of there you felt that something pretty stern and important 
had happened. It was no jump in the hay. The dark beautiful 
eyes of the Nigger stayed with you for days. 

When Faye came down from Sacramento and opened her 
house there was a flturry of animosity from the nvo incumbent'. 

209 


They got together to drive Faye out, but they discov'ered she was 
not in competition. ¦ • - ' j j 

Faye was the motherly type, big-breasted, big-hipped, and 
warm. She was a bosom to cry on, a soother and a stroker. The 
iron se.K of the Nigger and the tavern bacchanalianism of Jenny 
had their devotees, and they were not lost to Faye. Her house 
became the refuge of young men puling in puberty, mourning 
over lost wrtuc, and aching to lose some more. Faye was the re- 
assurer of misbegotten husbands. Her house took up the slack 
for frigid wives. It was tlic cirmamon-scented kitchen of one’s 
grandraodier. If any se-voial thing happened to you at Faye’s you 
felt it was an accident but forgivable. Her house led tlie youtlis 
of Salinas into the thorny path of se.K in the pinkest, smoothest 
way. Faye was a nice woman, not very bright, highly moral, and 
easily shocked. People trusted her and she trusted everyone. No 
one could want to hurt Faye once he knew her. She was no 
competition to the others. She was a third phase. 

Just as in a store or on a ranch the employees are images of. 
the boss, so in a whorehouse the girls are very like the madam, 
partly because she hires that kind and partly because a good 
madam imprints her personality on the business. You could stay 
a \Try long time at Faye’s before you would hear an ugly or sug- 
gestive word spoken. The wanderings to the bedrooms, the pay- 
ments, were so soft and casual they seemed incidental. All in all' 
she ran a hell of a fine house, as the constable and the sheriff 
knew. Faye contributed heavily to every charity. Having a revul- 
sion against disease, she paid for regular inspection of her girls. 
You had less chance of contracting a difficulty at Faye’s than 
with your Sunday School teacher. Faye soon became a solid and 
desirable citizen of the growing town of Salinas. 


1 1 

The girl Kate puzzled Faye -she was so young and pretty*, so 
ladylike, so well educated. Faye took her into her own inviolate 
bedroom and questioned her far more than she would if Kate 
had been another kind of girl. There were always women knock- 
ing on the door of a whorehouse, and Faye recognized most of 
them instantly. She could tick them off -lazy, vengeful, lustful, 
unsatisfied, greedy, ambitious. Kate didn’t fall into any of thbe 
classes. 

¦I hope you don’t mind my asking you all these questions,’ she 
said. ‘It just seems so strange that you should come here. Why, 

210 



you couia get a husband and a surrey and a corner Iiousc in 
town with no trouble at all, no trouble at :ill.’ And h'tiye rolled 
her wedding' band round and round on her fat little finger. 

Kate smiled shyly. ‘It’s so hard to explain. I hope you won’t 
insist on knowing. The happiness of someone very near and dctir 
to me is involved. Please don’t ask me.’ 

Faye nodded solemnly. ‘I’ve known things like that. I had one 
girl who was supporting her baby, and no one knew for a long, 
long time. That girl has a fine house and a husband in - there, I 
nearly told you where. I’d cut out my tongue before I’d tell. Do 
you hat'e a babj^, dear?’ 

Kate looked dovm to try to conceal the shine of tears in her 
eyes. When she could control her throat she whispered, ‘I’m 
sorry, I can’t talk about it.’ 

‘That’s all right. That’s all right. You just take your time.’ 
Faye was not bright, but she v.'zs far from stupid. She went to 
the sheriff and got herself cleared- There was no sen.se in taking 
chances. She knew something tvas wrong about Kate, .but if it 
didn’t harm the house it really wasn’t Faye’s business. 

Kate might have been a cfaiseller, but she wasn’t. She went to 
work right away. And when customers come back again and 
again and ask for a girl by name, you knov,’ you’ve got some- 
thing., A pretty face won’t do that. It was quite apparent to 
Faye that Kate was not learning a new trade. 

• There are two things it is good to Imow about a n<rw girl: first, 
will she work? and second, will she get along with the other 
girls? There’s nothing %viil upset a house line an ill-tempered 
girl. 

Faye didn’t haw long to wonder about the second question. 
Kate put herself out to be pleasant- She helped the other girls 
keep their rooms clean. She served them when they were sick, 
listened to their troubles, answered them in matters of love, and 
as soon as she had some, loaned them money. You cmildn’t 
want a better girl. She became best friend to c'reryone in the 
. house. 

There was no trouble Kate would not take, no d-rndgery she 

¦ was afraid of, and, in addition, she brought busines'.. She rr-y>ri 

¦ had her own group of regular oistomers, Kate was thoughtfu*! 
too. She remembered birthdays and always had a pi'csent and 
cake with candles. Faye reali^ she had a treasure, 

. don’t know thinl; it is easy to be a madam — jv.t 

..sit in a big chair and drink beer and take half the money the 
girls make, they think. But it’s not lii'.e that at all. You have to 

: 211 



feed the" girls -time’s ^oceries and a cook. Your laundr}' prob- 
lem is quite a bit more complicated than tlmt of a hotel. You 
Imve to keep the girls well and as happy as possible, and some of 
them can get pretty omcrj’. You have to keep suicide at an abso- 
lute minimum, and whores, particularly the ones getting along 
in years, are flighty with a razor; and that gets your house a bad 
name. 

It isn’t so easy, and if you have waste too you can lose money.- 
When Kate offered to help with the marketing and planning of 
meals Faj'e was pleased, although she didn’t know when the girj 
found time. Well, not only did the food improve, but tlie gro- 
cery bills' came down one-third the first month Kate took over. 
And the laundry - Faye didn’t know what Kate said to the man 
but that bill suddenly dropped twenty-five per cent. Faye didn’t 
see how she ever got along without Kate. 

In the late afternoon before business they sat together in 
Fa5’e’s room and drank tea. It was much nicer since Kate had 
painted the woodwork and put up lace curtains. The girls be- 
gan to realize that there were nvo bosses, not one, and they tverc 
glad, because Kate was veiy- easy to get along with; She made 
them turn more tricks but she wasn’t mean about it. They’d as 
likelv as not have a big laugh over it. 

By the time a year liad passed Faye and Kate were like 
mother and daughter. And the girls said, 'You vratch - she’ll 
own this house some day.’ 

Kate’s own hands were always busy, mosdy at drawn work on 
the sheerest of lawn handkerchiefs. She could make beautiful 
initials. Nearly all the girls carried and treasured her handker- 
chiefs. 

Gradually a perfectly natural tiling happened. Faye, tlie es- 
sence of mothcrliness, began to think of Kate as her daughter. 
She felt this in her breast and in her emotions, and her natural 
morality took hold. She did not want her daughter to be a 
whore. It was a perfectly reasonable sequence. 

Faye thought Iiard how she was going to bring up the subject. 
It was a problem. It was Faye’s nature to approach any subject 
sideways. She could not say, ‘I want you to give up whoring.’ 

She said, ‘If it is a secret, don’t answer, but I’ve always meant 
to ask you. What did the sheriff say to you — good Lord, is it a 
year ago? How the time goes! Quicker as you get older, I think. ^ 
He was nearly an hour with you. He didn’t— but of course not. 
He’s a family man. He goes to Jenny’s. But I don’t want to pry 
into J'our affairs.’ 


212 



¦There’s no secret at all about that,’ wikl Kale. ') woiilil 
told you. He told me I should go home. He was very nliv alumi 
it. When I explained that I. couldn’t, he was vci'y uie(! and 
understanding.’ 

‘Did you tell him why?’ Faye asked jealously. 

‘Of course not. Do you think I would tell him when I won’t 
tell you? Don’t be silly, darling. You’re such a funny little girl.’ 

Faye smiled and snuggled contentedly down in her chair. 

Kate’s face was in repose, but she was remembering every 
word of that inter\dew. As a matter of fact she rather liked the 
sheriff. He was direct. 


Ill 

He had closed the door of her room, glanced round with the 
quick recording ej'e of a good policeman — no photographs, none 
of the personal articles which identify, nothing but clothes and 
shoes. 

He sat down on her little cane rocking chair and his buttoclcs 
hung over on each side. His fingers got together in conference, 
talking to one another like ants. He spoke in an unemotional 
tone, almost as though he weren’t much interested in what he 
was saying. Maybe that was what impressed her. 

At first she put on her slightly stupid demure look, but after a 
few of his words she gave that up and bored him with her eyes, 
trying to read his thought. He neither looked in her eyes nor 
avoided them. But she w'as aware that he was inspecting her as 
she inspected him. She felt his glance go over the scar on her 
forehead almost as though he had touched it. 

‘I don’t want to make a record,’ he said quieth'. ‘I’ve held 
. office a long time. About one more term will be enough. You 
know, young woman, if this were fifteen years back I’d do some 
checking, and I guess I’d find something pretty nasty.’ He 
waited for some reaction from her but she did not protest. He 
modded his head slowly. ‘I don’t want to know,’ he said. ‘I want 
peace in this cotmty, and I mean all kinds of peace, and that 
means people getting to sleep at night. Now I haven’t met your 
husband,’ he said, and she Imew he noticed the .slight movement 
of her tightening muscles. ‘I hear he’s a very nice man. I hear 
also that he’s pretty hard hit.’ He looked into her eyes for a 
moment. T)on’t you want to know hov/ bad you shot him?’ 

‘Yes,’ she said. 

‘Well, he’s going to get well -smashed his shoulder, but he’s. 

-213 ' 



going to get well. That Chink is taking pretty good care of him. 
Course I don’t 'think he’ll lift anytliing with his left arm for 
quite a spell. A fortt'-four tears hell out of a man. If the Chink 
hadn’t come back he’d of bled to death, and you d be staging 
with me in the jail.’ 

Kate was holding her breath, listening for any hint of what 
was coming and not hearing any hints. 

‘I’m sorry,’ she said quietly. 

The sheriffs eyes became alert. ‘Now that’s tlte first time 
you’ve made a mistake,’ he said. ‘You’re not sorry. I knew some- 
body like you once- hung him twelve years ago in front of the 
county jail. We used to do that here.’ 

The little room with its dark mahogany bed, its marble-top 
washstand with bowl and pitcher and a door for the pot, its 
wallpaper endlessly repeating littie roses r- little roses -the little 
room was silent, die sound sucked out of it. 

The sheriff was staring at a picture of tiiree cherubim - j'ust 
heads, curly-haired, limpid-eyed, with wings about the size of 
pigeons’ wings growing out of where their necks would 'be. He 
frowned. ‘That’s a funny picture for a whorehouse,’ he said. 

‘It was here,’ said Kate. Apparently the preliminaries were 
over now. 

The sheriff straightened .up, undid his fingers, and held the 
arms of his cliair. Even his buttocks pulled in a little, ‘You left 
a couple of babies,’ he said. ‘Little boys. Now you calm down. 
I’m not going to try to get yoii to go back^ I guess I’d do quite a 
bit to Itcep you from going back. I think I know .you. I could 
ju.st run you over the county line and liave the next sheriff run 
you, and that could keep up till you landed splash in the Atlan- 
tic Ocean. But I don’t want to do that. I don’t care how you 
live as long as you don’t give me any trouble. .A whore is a 
whore.’ 

Kate asked evenly, ‘What is it you do.want?’ 

‘That’s more like it,’ the sheriff said. ‘Here’s what I- want. I 
notice you changed your name. I want you to keep your new 
name. I guess you made up someplace you came "from — well, 
that’s where jou came from. And your reason — that’s when 
5’ou re ma5’bc drunk— you keep your reason about two thousand 
miles away from King City.’ 

-She wa.s smiling a little, and not a forced smile. She was be- 
ginning to trust tin's man and to like him. 

One thing I thought of,’ he said. ‘Did you lutow many people 
around King City?’ 


214 



‘No.’ 

‘I heard about the knitting-needle,’ he said casually. ‘Well, it 
could happen that somebody you knew might come in here. 
That yoxur real hair colour?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Dye it black for a while. Lots of people look like somebody 
else.’ 

‘How about this?’ She touched her scar with a slender finger. 
WeU, that’s just a -what is that word? What is that goddam 
word? I had it this morning.’ 

‘Coincidence?’ 

‘That’s it -coincidence.’ He seemed to be finished. He got out 
tobacco and papers and rolled a clumsy, lumpy cigarette. He 
broke out a sulphur match and struck it on the block and held it 
away until its acrid blue fiame turned yellow. His cigarette 
burned crookedly up the side. 

Kate said, ‘Isn’t there a threat? I mean, what you’ll do if I — ’ 
‘No, there isn’t. I guess I could think up something pretty 
omerj', though, if it came to that. No, I don’t want you - what 
you are, what you do, or what you say - to hurt Mr Trask or his 
boys. You figure you died and now you’re somebody else and 
we’ll get along fine.’ • 

He stood up and went to the door, then turned. ‘I’ve got a 
boy -he’ll be twenty this year; big nice-looking fellow with a 
broken nose. Everybody likes him. I don’t want him in here. I’ll 
tell Faye to. Let him go to Jenny’s. If he comes in, you tell him 
to go to Jenny’s.’ He closed the door behind him. 

Kate smiled down at her fingers. 

IV 

, Faye twisted roimd in her chair to reach a piece of brown pan- 
ocha studded with walnuts. When she spoke it was around a 
mouth full of candy. PCate wondered uneasily whether she could 
read minds, for Faye said, ‘I still don’t like it as well. I said it 
then and I say it again. I lileed your hair blonde better. I don’t 
know what got into you to change it. You’ve got a fair com- 
I plexion.’ 

Kate caught a single thread of hair with fingernails of thumb 
and forefinger and gently drew it out. She was very clever. She 
told the best lie of all - the truth. ‘I didn’t want to tell you,’ she 
said, ‘I was afraid I might be recognized and that would hurt 
^ someone.’ 


215 



Faye got up out of her chair and went to Kate and kissed her. 
‘What a good diild it is/ she said. 'What a thoughtful dear.’ 

Kate said, 'Let’s have some tea. I’ll bring it in.’ She went out 
of the room, and in the hall- on the way to tlie kitchen she 
rubbed the ki.ss from her check with her fingertips. 

Back in her chair, Faye picked out a piece of panocha with a 
whole walnut showing through. She put it in her mouth and bit 
into a piece of walnut shell. The sharp, pointed fragment hit a 
hollow tooth and whanged into tlte nerve. Blue lights of pain 
flashed tltrough her. Her forehead became wet. When Kate came 
back with teapot and cups on a tray Fa 3 'e was clawing at her 
mouth with a crooked finger and whimpering in agony. 

, ‘What is it?’ Kate cried. 

‘Tooth- nutshell/ 

'Here, let me see. Open and point.’ Kate looked into the open 
niouth then went to the nut bowl on the fringed table for a nut 
pick. In a fraction of a second she had dug out the shell and 
laid it in the palm of her hand. ‘There it is.’ 

The nenx stopped shrieking and the pain dropped to an ache. 
‘Only that big? It felt like a house. Look, dear/ said Faye, ‘open 
that second drawer where iny medicine is. Bring the paregoric 
and a piece of cotton. Will you help me pack this tooth?’ 

Kate brought the bottle and pushed a little ball of saturated 
cotton into the tooth with the point of the nut pick, 'You ought 
to have it out.’ 

'I know; I will/ 

'I have three teeth missing on this side.’ 

‘W'ell, you'd never know it. That made me feel all shaky. 
Bring me the Pinkham, will you?’ She poured herself a slug of 
the vegetable compound and sighed with relief. ‘That’s a won- 
derful medicine,’ she said, ‘The woman who invented it was a 
saint.’ 


CHAPTER 20 


It was a pleasant afternoon. Fremont’s Peak was lighted 
pinkh' by the setting sun, and Faj'e could see it from hcr^win- 
dow. From over on Castrovillc Street came the sweet sound of 
jingling horse bells from an eight-horse grain team down from 

216 



the ridge. The cook was fighting pots in the kitchen. There was 
a rubbing sound on the wall and then a gentle tap on the door. 
‘Come in. Cotton Eye,’ Faye called. 

The door opened and the crooked little cotton-eyed piano 
player stood in the entrance, waiting for a sound to tell him 
where she was. 

“What is it you want?’ Faye asked. 

He turned to her. ‘I don’t feel good. Miss Faye. I want to 
crawl into my bed and not do no playing tonight.’ 

‘You were sick ttvo nights last week. Cotton Eye. Don’t you 
like your job?’ 

‘I don’t feel good.’ 

‘Well, all right. But I wish you’d take better care of yourself.’ 

¦ Kate said softly, ‘Let the gong alone for a couple of weeks. 
Cotton Eye,’ 

‘Oh, Iviiss Kate. I didn’t know you was here. I ain’t been 
smoking.’ 

‘You’ve been smoking,’ Kate said. 

‘Yes, Miss Kate, I will sure let it alone. I don’t feel good.’ He 
closed the door, and they could hear his hand rubbing along the 
wall to guide him. 

Faye said, ‘He told me he’d stopped.’ 

‘He hasn’t stopped.’ 

‘The poor thing,’ said Faye, ‘he doesn’t have much to live for.’ 
Kate stood in front of her. ‘You’re so sweet,’ she said. ‘You 
believe in everybody. Some day if you don’t watch, or I don’t 
watch for you, someone will steal the roof.’ 

‘Who’d want to steal from me?’ asked Faye. 

Kate put her hand on Faye’s plump shoulders. ‘Not everyone 
. is as nice as you are.’ 

Faye’s eyes glistened with tears. She picked up a handkerchief 
from the chair beside her and wiped her eyes and patted delic- 
ately at her nostrils. ‘You’re like my own daughter, Kate,’ she 
said. 

‘I’m begirming to believe I am. I never knew my mother. She 
died when I w'as small.’ 

Faye drew a deep breath and plunged into the subject. 

‘Kate, I don’t like you working here.’ 

‘Why not?’ 

Faye shook her head, trying to find words. ‘I’m not ashamed. 
I run a nice house. If I didn’t somebody else might run a bad 
house. I don’t do anybody any harm. I’m not ashamed.’ 

‘Why should you be?’ asked Kate. ' - 

217 



‘But I don’t like you worldng. 1' just don’t like it. You’re sort 
of my daughter. I don’t like my daughter working.’ 

‘Don’t be silly, darling,’ said Kate. ‘I have to -here or some- 
where else. 1 told you. 1 have to have the money.’ 

‘No, you don’t.’ 

‘Of course I do. Where else could I get it?’ 

‘You could he my daughter. You could manage the house. 
You could take care of things for me and not go upstairs. I’m 
not always well, you know.’ 

‘I Imow you’re not, poor darling. But I have to have money.’ 
¦‘There’s plentj' for both of us, Kate. I could give j^ou as mucli- 
as you make and more, and you’d be worth it.’ 

Kate shook her head sadly. ‘I do love you,’ she said. ‘And I 
wish I could do what you want. But you need your little re- 
scr%-c, and I -well, suppose something should happ^ to you? 
No, I must go on working. Do you know, dear, I have five regu- 
lars tonight?’ 

A jar of shock struck Faye. ‘I don’t want you to work.’ : 

'I liave to, Mother.’ 

The word did it. Faye burst into tears, and Kate sat on the 
arm of her chair and stroked her check and wiped her streaming 
eyes. The outburst sniffled to a close.' 

The dusk was settling deeply on the valley, Kate’s face was a 
glow of lightness under her dark hair. ‘Now you’re all right. I’ll 
go and look in on the kitchen and then dress.’ 

‘Kate, can’t you tell your regulars you’re sick?’ 

‘Of course not. Mother.’ 

,‘Katc, it’s Wednesday. Probably won’t be anybody in after one 
o’clock.’ 

'The Woodmen of the World are having a do.’ 

‘Oh, yes. But on Wednesday— the Woodmen won’t be here 
after uvo.' 

‘What arc you getting at?’ 

'Kate, when you dose, you tap on my door. I’ll liave a little 
surprise for you.' 

‘What kind of a surprise?’ 

‘Oh, a secret surprise! Will you ask the cook to come in as 
you go by the kitchen?’ 

‘Sounds lilte a cake surprise.’ 

‘Now don’t ask questions, darling. It’s a surprise.’ 

Kate kissed her. ‘What a dear you are. Mother.’ 

When she had closed the door behind her I^te stood for a 
moment in the hall. Her fingers caressed her pointed chin. Her 

218 


eyes were calm. Then she stretched her arras over her head and 
strained her body in a luxurious yawn. She ran her hands slowly 
down her sides from right under her breasts to her hips. Her 
mouth comers turned up a little, and she moved towards the 
kitchen. 


II 

Tlie few regulars drifted in and out and two drummers walked 
down the Line to look them over, but not a single Woodman of 
the World showed up. The girls sat yawming in the parlour until 
two o’clock, waiting. 

What kept the Woodmen away was a sad accident. Clarence 
Monteith had a heart attack right in the middle of the closing 
ritual and before supper. They laid him out on the carpet and 
dampened his forehead until the doctor came. Nobody felt like 
sitting doum to the doughnut supper. After Dr Wilde had 
arrived and looked Clarence over, the Woodmen made a stretcher 
by putting flagpoles through the sleeves of two overcoats. On the 
way home Clarence died, and they had to go for Dr Wilde again. 
And by the time they had made plans for the funeral and UTitten 
the piece for the Salmas Journal, nobody had any heart for a 
whorehouse. 

' The next day, when they found out what had happened, the 
girls all remembered what Ethel had said at ten minutes to wo. 

‘My Godl’ Ethel had said, ‘I never heard it so quiet. No 
music, cat’s got Eiate’s tongue. It’s like setting up with a corpse.’ 

Later Ethel was impressed with having said it- almost as if 
she knew. 

Grace had said, ‘I wonder what cat’s got Kate’s tongue. Don’t 
you 'feel good? Kkite- 1 said, don’t you feel good?’ 

Kate started. ‘Oh! I guess I was thinking of something.’ 

.. ,‘Well, I’m not,’ said Grace. ‘I’m sleepy. Why don’t we close 
up? Let’s ask Faye if we can’t lock up. There won’t be a Chink 
in tonight. I’m going to ask Faye.’ 

Kate’s voice cut in on her, ‘Let Faye alone. She’s not well. 
. We’ll close up at two.’ 

‘That clock’s way .wrong,’ said Ethel. ‘What’s the matter with 
Faye?’ 

Kate said, ‘Maybe that’s what I was thinking about. Faye’s 
not well. I’m worried, to death about her. She won’t show it if 
, she can help it’ 

' . ‘I thought she was all right,’ Grace said. 



Ethel hit the jackpot again. 'Well, she don’t look good to ine. 
She’s got a kind of flush. 1 noticed it.’ , 

lOate spoke very softly. ‘Don't you girls ever let her know I 
told you. She wouldn’t want you to worry. What a dear she is!’ 
‘Best goddam house I ever hustled,’ said Grace. 

Alice said, ‘\'ou better not let her hear you talk words like 
that.’ ' 

‘Balls!’ said Grace. ‘She knows all the words.’ 

‘She don’t like to hear them -not from us.’ 

Kate said patiently, ‘I want to tell you what happened. I was 
having tea witli her late this afternoon and she fainted dead 
away. I do wish she’d sec a doctor.’ 

‘I noticed she had a kind of bright flush,’ Ethel repeated. 
'Tltat clock’s way wrong but I forget which way.’ 

Kate said, ‘You girls go to bed. I’ll lock up.’ 

When thej’- were gone Kate went to her room and put on her 
pretty new print dress that made her look like a little girl.. She 
brushed and braided her hair and let it hang behind in one thick 
pigtail tied with a little white bow. She patted her checks witli 
Florida water. For a moment she hesitated, and then from the 
top bureau drawer she took a little gold watch that bung from a 
fleur-de-lis pin. She wrapped it in one of her fine lawn handker- 
chiefs and went out of the room. 

The hall was very dark, but a rim of light showed under 
Faye’s door. Kate tapped softly. 

Faye called, ‘Who is it?’ 

'It’s Kate.' 

‘Don’t 5'ou come in yet. You wait outside. I’ll tell you when,’ 
Kate heard a rustling and a scratching in the room. Then Faye 
called, ‘All right. Come in.’ 

The room was decorated, Japanese lanterns with candles in 
them hung on bamboo sticks at the corners, and red crepe paper 
tu’isted in scallops from the centre to the comers to give the 
effect of a tent. ,On the tabic with candlesticks around it was a , 
big white cake and a box of chocolates, and beside these a basket 
with a magnum of champagne peeking out of crushed ice. Faye 
wore her best lacc dress and her eyes were shiny with emotion. , 
'What in the world?’ Kate cried. She closed the door. ‘Why, it 
looks like a parn’ ! ’ ’ 

'It is a party. It’s a party for my dear daughter.’ 

‘It’s not my birthday,’ 

Faye said, ‘In a way maybe it is.’ . . 

I don t know wliat you mean. But I brought you a present.’ 

220 



She laid the folded handkerchief in Faye’s lap. ‘Open it care- 
fully/ she said. 

Faye held the watch up. 'Oh, my dear, my dear! You crazy 
child ! No, I can’t rake it.’ She opened the face and ±en picked 
open the back with her fingernail. It was engraved - ‘To C. with 
all my heart from A.’ 

‘It was my mother’s watch/ Kate said softly. ‘I would like my 
new mother to have it.’ 

‘My darling child ! My darling child ! ’ 

‘Mother would be glad.’ 

‘But it’s my party. I have a present for my dear daughter, but 
I’ll have to do it in my own way. Now, Kate, you open the 
bottle of wine and pour uvo glasses while I cut the cake. I want 
it to be fancy.’ 

When everything was ready Faye took her seat behind the 
table. She raised her glass. ‘To my daughter -may you have long 
life and happiness.’ And when they had drunk Kate proposed, 
‘To my mother.’ 

Faye said, ‘You’U make me cry -don’t make me cry. Over on 
the bureau, dear. Bring the little mahogany box. There, that’s 
the one. Now put it on the table here and open it.’ 

In the polished box lay a rolled white paper tied with a red 
ribbon. ‘What in the world is it?’ Kate asked. 

‘It’s my gift to you. Open it.’ 

Kate very carefully untied the red ribbon and unrolled the 
. tube. It was written elegantly with shaded letters, and it was well 
and carefully drav/n and witnessed by the cook. 

‘AH my worldly goods without exception to Kate Albey be- 
cause I regard her as my daughter.’ 

It was simple, direct and legally irreproachable. Kate read it 
three times, looked back at the date, studied the cook’s si^a- 
ture. Faye watched her, and her lips were parted in expectation. 
When Kate's lips moved, reading, Faye’s lips mowd. 

Kate rolled the paper and tied the ribbon around it and put it 
in the box and closed the lid. She sat in her chair. 

. Faye said at last, ‘Are. you pleased?’ 

Kate’s eyes seemed to peer into and beyond Faye s eyes — to 
penetrate tlie brain beliind the eyes. Kate said , quietly, ‘I’m try- 
ing to hold on. Mother. I didn’t know anyone could be so good. 
I’m afraid if I say anything too quickly or come too close to you. 
I’ll break to pieces.’ _ . i - . 

It was more dramatic than Faye had anricipated, qmet 
electric. Faye said, ‘It’s a funnj' present, isn’t it? 

221 



: ‘Funny? No, it isn’t funny.’ 

‘I mean, a will is a strange present. But it means more than 
that. Now you are my re^ daughter I can tell 5’ou. I — no, mr— . 
have cash and securities in excess of sixtj’ thousand dollars. In 
my desk are notations of accounts and safe-deposit boxes. I sold 
the place in Sacramento for a wry good price, Why are you so 
silent, child? Is something bothering you?’ 

‘A wall sounds like death. That’s thrown a pall.’ 

‘But evexy’one should make a wDl.’ 

‘I know, Mother.’ Kate smiled rucfull3'. W thought crossed 
my mind. I thought of all your kin coming in angrily to break 
such a will as this. You can’t do this.’ 

‘My poor little girl, is that what’s bothering j’ou? I have no 
folks. As far as I know, I have no kin. And if I did have some- 
, who would know? Do you think you arc tlie onlj’ one with 
secrets? Do j'ou think I use the name I was bom with?’ 

Kate looked long and levclly at Faye. 

‘Kate,’ she cried, ‘Kate, it’s a party. Don’t be sad ! Don’t be 
frozen ! ’ 

Kate got up, gently pulled the table aside, and sat down on 
the floor. She put her check on Faye’s knee. Her slender fingers 
traced a gold thread on the skirt through its intricate leaf pat- 
tern. And Faye stroked Kate’s cheek and hair- and touched her 
strange ears. Shyly Fat'e’s fingers c.xplored the borders of the 
, scar. 

‘I think I’ve never been so happy before,’ said Kate. 

. ‘My darling. You make me happy too. Happier titan I have 
ever been. Now I don’t feel alone. Now I feel safe.’ 

Kate picked delicately at the gold thread with her finger- 
nails. 

They sat in the warmth for a long time before Faj’c stirred. 
‘Kate,’ she said, Vc’re forgetting. It’s a party. We’ve forgotten 
the wine. Pour it, child. W’e'll have a little celebration.’ - 

Kate said uneasih', ‘Do we need it, Mother?’ 

‘It’s good. Why not? I like to take on a little load. It lets the 
poison out. Don’t j-ou like champagne, Kate?’ 

‘Well, I never have drunk much. It’s not good for me.’ 

' ‘Nonsense. Pour it, darling.’ 

Kate got up from the floor and filled the glasses. 

Faye said, ‘Now drink it down. I’m watching you. You’re not 
going to let an old woman get silly by herself,’ 

‘You’re not an old woman. Mother.’ 

Don’t talk— drink it. I won’t touch mine until t’ours is 


empty.’ She held her glass imtil Kate had emptied hers, then 
gulprf it. ‘Good, that’s good/ she said. ‘Fill them up. Now, 
come on, dear - down the rat-hole. After nvo or three .the bad 
things go away.’ 

Kate’s chemistry screamed against the wine. She remembered, 
and she was afraid. 

Faye said, ‘Now let me see the bottom, child - there. You see 
how good it is? Fill up again.’ 

The transition came to Kate almost immediately after the 
second glass. Her fear evaporated, her fear of anything dis- 
appeared. This was what she had been afraid of, and now it ^TOS 
too late. The wine had forced a passage through all the carefully 
built barriers and defences and deceptions and she didn’t care. 
The thing she had learned to cover and control was lost. Her 
voice became chiU and her mouth was thin. Her wide-set eyes 
slitted and grew watchful and sardonic. 

‘Now you drink -Mother -while I watch/ she said. ‘There’s 
a -dear. I’ll bet you can’t drink two without stopping.’ 

‘Don’t bet me, Kate. You’d lose. I can drink six without stop- 
ping.’ 

‘Let me see you.’ 

‘If I do, will you?’ 

‘Of course.’ 

The contest started, ^nd a puddle of wine spread out over the 
table-top ^d the wine went down in the magnum. 

Fa3'e giggled. ‘When I was a girl -I could tell j'ou stories 
maybe you wouldn’t believe.’ 

Kate said, ‘I could tell stories’ nobody would beh'eve.’ 

‘You? Don’t be silly. You’re a child.’ 

Kate laughed. ‘You never saw such a child. This is a child - 
yes -a child!’ She laughed with a thin penetrating shridc. 

The sound got through the \vine that was muffling Faye. She 
centred her eyes on Kate. ‘You look so strange/ she said. ‘I guess 
it’s the lamplight. You look different.’ 

‘I am different.’ 

‘Call me “Mother”, dear.’ 

'Mother — dedr^ 

‘Kate, we’re going to have such a good life.’ 

‘You bet we are. You don’t even know. You don’t know.’ 

Tve always wanted to go to Exurope. We could get on a ship 
and have nice clothes — dresses from Paris.’ 

‘Maybe we’ll do that— but not now.’ 

“Why not, Kate? I have plenty of money.’ 

223 



‘We’ll have plenty more.’ 

Faye spoke pleadingly. ‘Why don’t we go now? We could sell 
the house. With the business we’ve got, we could get maybe ten 
thousand dollars for it.’ 

‘No.’ 

‘What do you mean, no? It’s my house. I can sell it.’ 

‘Did you forget I’m your daughter?’ 

‘I don’t like your tone, Kate. What's the matter with you? Is . 
there any more wine?’ 

‘Sure, there’s a little. Look at it through the bottle. Here, drink 
it out of tire bottle. That’s right - Mother - spill it down your 
neck. Get it in under your corset. Mother, against your fat 
stomach.’ - . 

Faj-c wailed, ‘Kate, don’t be mean! We were feeling so nice.- 
What do you want to go and spoil it for?’ 

Kate wrenched the bottle from her hand. ‘Here, give me that.’ 
She tipped it up and drained it and dropped it on the floor. Her 
face was sharp and her eyes glinted. The Ups of her little mouth 
were parted to show her small sharp teetli, and the canines were 
longer and more pointed than the others. She laughed softly. 
‘Mother -dear Mother -I’m going to show you how to run a 
whorehouse. We’ll fix the grey slugs that come in here and dump 
their nasty little loads -for a dollar. We’ll give them pleasure. 
Mother dear.’ 

Faye said sharplj', ‘Kate, you’re drunk. I don’t know what 
you’re talking about.’ 

‘You don’t. Mother dear? Do you want me to tell you?’ 

‘I want you to be sweet. I want you to be like you were.’ 

‘Well, it’s too late. I didn’t want to drink the wine. But you, 
you nasty fat worm, you made me. I’m your dear, .sweet daugh- 
ter— don’t you remember? Well, I remember how surprised you 
were that I had regulars. Do you think I’ll give them up? Do 
you think they give me a mean little dollar in quarters? No, tltcy 
give me ten dollars, and tlie price is going up all the timei They 
can’t go to anybody else. Nobody else is anj' good for tliem.’ 

Faye wept hire a child. ‘Kate,’ she said, 'don’t tallc like that. 
You’re not like that. You’re not like that.’ 

‘Dear Motlier, sweet fat Mother, take down the pants of one 
of my regulars. Look at the heclmarks on the groin — very 
pretty. And the little cuts that bleed for a long time. Oh, Mother 
dear. I've got the sweetest set of razors all in a case -and so 
sharp, so sharp.' 

Faye struggled to get out of her cliair. Kate pushed her back. 

224 



tnd do j'ou know. Mother dear, that’s the way this whole house" 
going to be. The price will be twenty dollars, and we’ll make 
le bastards take a bath. We’ll catch the blood on white silk 
andkerchiefs - Mother dear -blood from the little knotted 
hips.’ 

In her chair Faye began to scream hoarsely. Kate was on her 
istantly with a hard hand cupped over her mouth. ‘Don’t make 
noise. There’s a good darling. Get snot all over your daugh- 
ar’s hand -but no noise.’ Tentatively she took her hand away 
nd wiped it on Faye’s skirt. 

Faye whispered, ‘I want you out of the house. I want you out. 
run a good house without nastiness. I want you out.’ 

‘I can’t go, Motlier. I can’t leave you alone, poor dear.’ Her 
nice chilled. ‘Now I’m sick of you. Sick of j-^ou.’ She took a 
wineglass from the table, went to the bureau, and poured pare- 
;oric until the glass was half full. ‘Here, Mother, drink it. It 
vill be good for you.’ 

‘I don’t want to.’ 

‘There’s a good dear. Drink it.’ She coaxed the fluid into 
Faye., ‘Now one more swallow - just one more.’ 

Faye mumbled thickly for a while and then she rela.xed in her 
;hair and slept, snoring thickly. 

Ill 

Dread began to gather in the corners of Kate’s mind, and out of 
dread came panic. She remembered the other time and a nausea 
swept through her. She gripped her hands together, and the 
panic grew. She lighted a candle from the lamp and went un- 
steadily down the dark hall to the kitchen. She poured dry mus- 
tard in a glass, stirred water into it until it was partly fluid, and 
drank it. She held on to the edge of the sink while the paste 
went burning down. She retched and strained again and again. 
At the end of it, her heart was pounding and she was weak - but 
the wine was overcome and her mind was clear. 

She went over the evening in her mind, moving from scene to 
scene like a sniffing animal. She bathed her face and washed out 
the sink and put the mustard back on tlie shelf. Then she went 
back to Faye’s room. 

The day was coming fast. Kate sat beside the bed and watched 
so that it stood black against the sky. Faye was still snoring in 
her chair. Kate watched her for a few moments and then she 
fixed Faye’s bed. Kate dragged and strained and lifted the dead 

225 


“weight b{ the sleeping woman. On the bed Kate undressed Faye 
and washed her face and put her clothes away. 

The day tvas coming fast. Kate sat beside the bed and watched 
the relaxed faccj die mouth open, lips blowing in and out. 

Faye made a restless movement and her dry lips slobbered a 
few thick words and sighed off to a snore again. 

Kate’s eyes becarrie alert. She opened the top bureau drawer 
and e-xamined the bottles which constituted the medicine chest 
of the house -paregoric, Pain Killer, Lydia Pinkham, iron wine 
tonic. Hall’s Cream Salve, Epsom salts, castor oil, ammonia. 
She carried the ammonia bottle to the bed, saturated a handker- 
chief, and, standing well away, held the cloth over Payees nose 
and mouth.. 

The strangling, shocking fumes went in, and Faye came 
snorting and fighting out of her black web. Her eyes were unde 
and terrified. 

Kate said, 'It’s all right. Mother. It’s all right. You had a 
nightmare. You had a bad dream.’ 

; ‘Yes, a dream,’ and then sleep overcame her again and she fell 
back and began to snore, but the shock of the ammonia had 
lifted her up nearer consciousness and she was more restless. 
Kate put the bottle back in its drawer. She straightened the 
table, mopped up the spilled wine, and carried the glasses to the 
Idtchcn. 

The house was dusky with dawn light creeping in around the 
edges of the blinds. The cook stirred in his lean-to behind tlie 
kitchen, groping for his clothes and putting on his clodhopper 
shoes. 

Kate moved quietly She drank two glasses of water and filled 
the glass again and carried it back to Faye’s room and closed the 
door. She lifted Faye’s right eyelid, and the eye looked raldshly 
up at her, but it was not rolled back in her head. Kate acted 
slowly and precisely. She picked up the handkerchief and 
smelled it. Some of the ammonia had evaporated but the smell 
was still sharp. She laid the cloth lightly over Faye’s face, and 
when Faye twisted and turned and came near to waking, Kate 
took the handkerchief away and let Faye sink back. This she 
did three times. She put the handkerchief away and picked up 
an ivory crochet hook from the marble top of the bureau. She 
turned doum the cover and pressed the blunt end of the ivory 
against Faye’s flabby breast with a steady, increasing pressure 
until the sleeping woman whined and -writhed. Then Kate ex- 
plored the sensitive places of the body with the hook -under the 

226 


arm, the groin, the ear, the clitoris, and always she removed 
the pressure just before Faye awakened fully. 

Faye was very near the surface now. She whined and snifided 
and tossed. Kate stroked her forehead and ran smooth fingers 
over her inner arm and spoke softly to her. 

‘Dear— dear. You’re having such a bad dream. Come out of 
the bad dream. Mother.’ 

. Faye’s breathing grew more regular. She hea%ed a great sigh 
and turned on her side and settled do\ra with little grunts of 
comfort. 

Kate stood up from the bed and a wave of dizziness rose in 
her head. She steadied herself, tlren went to the door and 
listened, shpped out, and moved cautiously to her own room. 
She undressed quickly and put on her nightgown and a robe 
and slippers. She brushed her hair and put it up and covered it 
with a sleeping-cap, and she sponged her face with Florida 
water. She went quietly back to Faye’s room. 

Faye was still sleeping peacefully on her side. Kate opened the 
door to the hall. She carried the glass of water to the bed and 
• poured cold water in Faye’s ear. 

. Faye screamed, and screamed again. Ethel’s frightened face 
looked out of her room in time to see Kate in robe and slippers 
at Faye’s door. The cook was right behind Kate, and he put out 
his hmid to stop her. 

‘Now don’t go in there. Miss Kate. You don’t Imow what’s in 
there.’ . 

‘Nonsense, Faye’s in trouble.’ Kate burst in and ran to the bed. 
Faye’s eyes were wild and she was crying and moaning. 

‘What is it? What is it, dear?’ 

The cook was in the middle of the room, and three sleep- 
haggard girls stood in the doorway. 

‘Tell me, what is it?’ Kate cried. 

‘Oh, darling -the dreams, the dreams! I can’t stand them!’ 

^ Kate. turned to the door. ‘She’s -had a nightmare — she’ll be all 
right. You go back to bed. I’ll stay with her a while. Alex, bring 
a pot of tea.’ 

Kate was tireless. The other girls remarked on it. She put cold 
towels on Faye’s aching head and held her shoulders and the 
cup of tea for her. She petted and babied her, but the look of 
horror would not go out of Faye’s eyes. At ten o’clock Alex 
brought in a can of beer and without a word put it on the 
bureau top. Kate held a glass of it to Faye’s lips. 

‘It will help, darling. Drink it down.’ 

227 


‘I never want another drink.’ 

‘Nonsense! Drink it down like medicine. That’s a good girl. 
Now just lie back and go to sleep.’ 

‘I’m afraid to sleep.’ 

‘Were the dreams so bad?’ 

'Horrible, horrible!’ ^ 

‘Tell me about them, Mother. Maybe that will help.’ 

Faye slrranlt back. ‘I wouldn’t tell anyone. How I could have 
dreamed them? They weren’t like my dreams.’ 

‘Poor little Mother! I love you,’ Kate said. *¥00 go to sleep. 
I’ll keep your dreams away.’ 

• Gradually Faye slid off to sleep. Kate sat beside the bed, 
.studying her. 


CHAPTER 21 
t 

In n u m a n affairs of danger and delicacy successful conclu- 
sion is sharply limited by hurry. So often men trip by being in 
a rush. If one were properly to perform a difficult and subtle act, 
he should first inspce t the end to be achieved and then, once he 
had accepted the end as desirable, he should forget it completely 
and cona'ntrate solelv on the means. By this method he would 
not be moved to false action by an.xiety or hurry or fear. Very 
few people learn this. 

tX'liat made Kate so effective was the fact that she had either 
learned it or had been horn with the knowledge. Kate nct'er 
hurried. If a barrier aro.se, she waited until it had disappeared 
before continuing. She svas capable of complete relaxation be- 
tween the times for action. Also, she was mistress of a technique 
which is the ha;-is of good wrestling- that of letting your oppo- 
nent do the heavy work towards his own defeat, or of guiding 
his strength towards his weaknesses. 

Kate was in no hurrv She thought to the end very quickly 
and then put it out of her mind. She set herself to work on 
method. She built a strucuirc and attacked it, and if it showed 
the slightest shakincss she tore it down and started afresh. TIus 
she did only late at night or otherwise when she was completely 
alone, so that no change or preoccupation was noticeable in her 
manner. Her building was constructed of personalities, materials. 



knowledge, and time. She had access to the iirst and last, and she 
set about getting knowledge and materials, but while she did that 
she set in motion a series of imperceptible springs and pendu- 
lums and left them to pick up their own momenta. 

First the cook told about the will. It must have been the cook. 
He thought he did anytvay. Kate heard about it from Ethel, and 
she confronted him in the kitchen where he was kneading bread, 
his hairy big arms floured to the elbows and his hands yeast- 
bleached. 

‘Do j^ou think it was a good thing to tell about being a wit- 
ness?’ she said mildly. ‘What do you think Miss Faye is going 
to think?’ '• 

He looked confused. ‘But I didn’t — ’ 

‘You didn’t what-teU about it or think it would hurt?’ 

‘I don’t think I — ’ 

‘You don’t think you told? Only three people knew. Do you 
think I told? Or do you think Miss Faye did?’ She saw the 
puzzled look come into his eyes and knew that by now he was 
far from sure that he had not told. In a moment he would be 
sure that he had. 

Tliree of the girls questioned Kate about the will, coming to 
her together for mutud strength. 

Kate said, ,‘I iion’t think Faye would like me to discuss it. 
Aloe should have kept his mouth shut.’ Their wills wavered, and 
she said, ‘Why don’t you ask Faye?’ 

‘Oh, we wouldn’t do that ! ’ 

‘But you dare to talk behind her back ! Come on now, let’s go 
in to her and you can ask her the questions.’ 

‘No, Kate, no.’ 

‘Well, FU have to tell her you asked. Wouldn’t you rather be 
there? Don’t you think she would feel better if she knew you 
v/feren’t talking behind her back?’ 

‘WeU— ’ 

I know I would. I always h’ke a person who comes right out.’ 
Quietly she surrounded and nudged and pushed until they stood 
in Faye’s room. 

ICate said, ‘The}’- asked me about a certain you-know-what. 
Alex admits he let it out.’ 

Faye was sh'ghtly puzzled. ‘Well, dear, I can’t see that it’s 
such a secret.' 

Kate said, ‘Oh, I’m glad you feel that way. But you can see 
that I couldn’t mention it until you did.’ 

‘You think ifls bad to tell, Kate?’ 

229 



‘Oh, not at all. I’m glad, but it seemed to me that it wouldn’t 
be loyal of me to mention it before y'ou did.’ 

‘You’re sweet, Kate. I don’t see any harm. You see, girls, I’m 
alone in the world and I have taken Kate as my daughter. She 
takes such care of me. Get the box, Kate.' 

And each girl took the will in her own hands and inspected 
it. It was so simple tliey could repeat it word for word to the 
other girls. 

They watched Kate to see how she would change, perliaps be- 
come a tyrant, but, if anything, she was nicer to them. 

A week later when Kate became ill, she went right on with her 
supervision of the house, and no one would have known if she 
hadn’t been found standing rigid in the hall with agony printed 
on her face. She begged the girls not to tell Faye, but they were 
outraged, and it was Faye who forced her to bed and called Dr 
Wilde. 

He was a nice man and a pretty good doctor. He looked at her 
tongue, felt her pulse, asked her a few intimate questions, and 
then tapped his lower lip. 

‘Right here?’ he asked, and exerted a little pressure. on the 
small of her back. ‘No? Here? Does this hurt? So. Well, I 
tJiink you just need a kidney' flushing.’ He left yellow, green, and 
red pills to be taken in sequence. The pills did good work. 

She did have one litdc flare-up. She told Faye, ‘I’ll go to the 
doctor’s ofiicc.’ . 

‘I’ll ask him to come here.’ 

‘To bring me some more pills? Nonsense. I’ll go in the 
morning.' 

II 

Dr Wilde was a good man and an honest man. He was accus- 
tomed to say of his profession that all he was sure of was that 
sulphur would cure the itch. He was not casual about his prac- 
tice. Like so many country doctors, he was a combination doc- 
tor, priest, psychiatrist, to his. town. He knew most of the 
secrets, weaknesses, and the braveries of Salinas. He never learned 
to take death easily. Indeed the dcatli of a patient always gave 
Iiim a sense of failure and hopeless ignorance. He was not a bold, 
man, and he used surgery only as a last and fearful resort. Tlie 
drugstore was coming in to help the doctors, but Dr Wilde was 
one of the fetv to maintain his own dispensary and to compound 
his- own prescriptions. Many years of overwork and interrupted 
sleep had made liim a little vague and preoccupied. 

230 



At eight-thirty on a Wcdncsvlay nuMni(\>; \sau' Vo' 

Main Street, climbrf the stairs of the .Wonteiw v\'\uu\ 
Building, and \valked along the twrkior \u\iii \h,o \\w- 

door which said, ‘Dr Wilde — Oflicc Hotns 11,, 

At nine-thirty Dr Wilde put his buggy iit the livow and 
wearily lifted out his black bag. He had bevn vnu in the Ale. d 
presiding at the disintegration of old, old lady tienuau, She h:>,l 
not been able to terminate her life neatly. There wetv vVvhv'ilN, 
wen now Dr Wilde wondered whether the tough, drv. striugv 
ife was completely gone out of her. She was ninety-sex on e.isd .x 
ieath certificate meant notliing to her. Why, site Iiad cxxnxvtx\l 
the priest.who prepared her. The mysterj' of death w-as on hint. 
It often was. Yesterday, Allen Day, thirty-seven, six feet one 
inch, strong as a bull and valuable to four hundred acres and a 
large family, had meekly surrendered his life to pncimionia after 
a little exposure and three days of fever. Dr Wilde knew it was 
a myster}’. His eyelids felt grainy. He thought he would tak.c a 
sponge bath and have a drink before his first office patients 
arrived xvith their stomach-aches. 

He climbed the stairs and put his worn key in the lock of Ju's 
office door. The key would not turn. He set his bag on the floor 
and exerted pressure. The key refused to budge. He grabbed the 
door-knob and pulled outwards and rattled the key. The door 
was opened from within. Kate stood in front of him. 

‘Oh, good morning. Lock was stuck. Blow did you get in?' 

‘It.xx’asn't locked. I was early and came in to wait.’ 

'' ‘Wasn’t locked?’ He tiuncd the key the other way and saw 
•that, sure enough, the little bar slipped out easily. 

‘I’m^ getting old, I guess,’ he .said. Tm forgetful.’ He sighed. 

‘I don’t Imow xvhy I lock it, anx-way. You could get in with a 
piece of bailing wire. And who’d want to get in, anyway?’ He 

seemed to see her for the first time. ‘I don’t have office hours 
unril elex'en.’ 


Kate said, ‘I needed some more of those pills and I couldn’t 
come later.’ 

‘Pills? Oh, yes. You’re the girl from down at Faye’s ’ 

1 hats right.’ 

‘Feeling better?’ 

‘Yes, the pills help.’ 

““O' '0 •»= 

Whats a dispensary?’ 

.‘Over there -that door.’ 


231 



‘I guess'you must have.’ _ ' 

. ‘Getting old. How is Faye?’ . . ... 

‘Well, I’m worried about her. She was real sick a while ago. 
Had cramps and went a little out of her head. : ' 

‘She’s had a stomach disorder before,’ Dr -Wilde said. ‘You 
cim’t live like that and eat all hours and be very- well. I can’t, 
anyway. We just call it stomach trouble. Comes from eating too 
much and staying up all night. Now — the pills. Do you remem- 
ber what colour?’ ’ , , ' ' 

‘There were three kinds, ydlow, red, and ^een,’ , 

‘Ohyes. Yes, I remember.’ ¦ . 

While he poured pills into a round cardboard box she stood in 
the doorway. ' . ¦ - . ¦ . 

‘What a lot of medicines!’ 

Dr Wilde said, ‘Yes - and the older I get, the fewer I use. I got 
some of those when I started to practise. Never used them. 
That’s a beginner’s stock. I was going to experiment - alchemy.’ 

‘What?’ . _ 

‘Nothing. Here you are. Tell Faye to get some sleep. and eat 
some vegetables. I’ve been up all night. Let yourself out, will 
you?’ He wmt wavering back into the surgery. 

Kate glanced after him and then her eyes flicked over the lines 
of bottles and containers. She. closed the dispensary door and 
looked round the outer office. One. book in the case was out of 
line. She pushed it back until it was shoulder to shoulder -tvith 
its brothers. . . ' . 

She. picked up her big handbag from the leather sofa and left. 

In her own room Kate took five small bottles and a strip of 
scribbled paper from her handbag. She put the whole works in 
the toe of a stocking, pushed the wad into a rubber overshoe, 
and stood it with its fellow in the back of her closet. 

I i.i 

During the following months a gradual change came over Faye’s 
house. The girls were sloppy and touchy. If they had been told 
to clean themselves and their rooms a deep’ resentment would 
have set in and the house would have reeked of ill temper. But it 
didn’t work that way. 

Kate said at table one e%'ening that she had just happened to 
look in Ethel’s room, and it was so neat and pretty she couldn’t 
help buying her a present. When Ethel unwrapped the package 
right at the table it was a big bottle of Hoj'fs German, enough 

232 



to keep her smelling sweet for a long time. Etliel was pleased and 
she hoped Kate hadn’t seen the dirt}' clothes under the bed. 
After supper she not only got the clothes out but brushed the 
floors and swept the cobwebs out of the corners. 

Then Grace looked so prett}' one afternoon that Kate couldn’t 
help giving her the rhinestone butterfly pin she was wearing. 
And Grace had to rush up and put on a clean shirtwaist to set it 
off. 

Alex in the kitchen, who if he had believed what was usually 
said of him would have considered liimself a murderer, found 
that he had a magic hand with biscuits. He discovered tliat cook- 
ing was something you couldn’t learn. You had to feel it. 

Cotton Eye learned that nobody hated him. His tub-thump- 
ing piano-playing changed imperceptibly. 

He told Kate, ‘It’s funnv what you remember when you think 
back.’ 

‘Like wliat?’ she asked. 

‘Well, like this,’ and he played for her. 

‘That’s lovely,’ she said. ‘What is it?’ 

‘Well, I don’t know. I think it’s Chopin.- If I could just see 
the music!’ 

- He told her how he had lost his sight, and he had never told 
anyone else. It was a bad story. That Saturday night he took the 
chain off the piano strings and played something he had been 
remembering and practising in the morning, something called 
‘Moonlight’, a piece by Beethoven, Cotton Eye thought. 

Ethel said it sounded like moonlight and did he know the 
words. 

¦ ‘It don’t have words,’ said Cotton Eye, 

Oscar Trip, up from Gonzales for Saturday night, said, ‘Well, 
it ought to have. It’s prett}',’ 

One night there w'ere presents for every'one because Faye’s was 
the best house, the cleanest, and nicest in the whole county - and 
who was responsible for that? Why, the girls - who else? And 
did they ever taste seasoning like in that stew?’ 
i Alex retired into the kitchen and shyly wiped his eyes with the 
t>ack of his wrist. He bet he could make a plum pudding which 
would knock their eyes out. 

Georgia was getting up at ten every morning and taking piano 
lessons from Cotton Eye, and her nails were clean. 

Coming back from eleven o’clock mass on a Sunday morning, 
Grace said to Trixie, ‘And I was about ready to get married and 
gwe up whoring. Can you imagine?’ 

233 



‘It’s sure nice; said Trixie. ‘Jenny’s girls came over for Paye’s 
birthday cake and they couldn’t believe their eyes. They don’t 
talk about nothing else but how it is at Faye’s. Jenny’s sore.’ 

‘Did you see the score on the blackboard this morning?’ 

‘Sure I did - eighty-seven tricks in one week. Let Jenny or the 
Nigger match that when there ainh no holidays!’ 

‘No holidays, hell. Have you forgot it’s Lent? They ain’t 
turning a trick at Jenny’s.’ 

After her illness and her evil dreams Faye was quiet and de- 
pressed. Kate knew she was being watched, but there was no 
help for that. And' she had made sure the rolled paper was still 
in the box and all the girls had seen it or heard about it. . 

One afternoon Faye looked up from her solitaire game as Kate 
knocked and entered the room. 

‘How do you feel, Mother?’ ^ 

‘Fine, just fine.’ Her eyes were secretive. Faye wasn’t v^ 
clever. ‘You know,. Kate, I’d like to go to Europe.’ 

‘Well, how wonderful ! And you deserve it and you can afford 
it.’ 

‘I don’t want to go alone. I want you to go with me.’ , 

Kate looked at her in astonishment. ‘Me? You want to take 
me?’ ' - . ' 

‘Sure, why not?’ 

‘Oh, you sweet dear 1 When can we go?’ 

‘You want to?’ 

‘I've always dreamed of it. When can we go? Let’s go soon!’ 

Faye’s eyes lost their suspicion and her face relaxed. ‘Maybe 
next summer,’ she said. ‘We can plan it for next summer, 
Katel’ ' . ... 

‘Yes, Mother.’ 

‘You -you don't turn any tricks any more, do you?’ 

‘Why should I? You take such good care of'me.* 

Faye slowly gathered up the cards and tapped them square, 
and dropped them in the table drawer. 

Kate pulled up a chair. ‘I want to ask your advice about some- 
thing.’ 

‘What is it?’ 

‘Well, you know I’m trying to help you.’ 

‘You’re doing everything, darling.’ 

‘You know our biggest expense is food, and it gets bigger in 
the winter.’ 

‘Yes.’ . , . 

‘Well, right now you can buy fruit and all kinds of vegetables 

234 



or two bits a lug. And in the winter you know what we pay for 
armed peaches and canned string beans.’ 

¦ ‘You aren’t planning to start preserving ? ’ 

•Well, why shouldn’t we ? ’ 

‘What will Alex say to that?’ 

‘Mother, you can beliet'e it or not, or you can ask liim. Alex 
suggested it.’ 

‘No!’ 

‘Well, he did. Cross my heart.’ 

‘Well, I’ll be damned -Oh, I’m sorry, sweet. It slipped out.’ 
The. kitchen turned into a cannery’ and all the girls helped. 
Alex truly believed it tras his idea. At the end of the season he 
had a silver watch with his name engraved on the back to prove 
it. 

Ordinarily both Faye and Kate had their supper at the long 
table in the dining-room, but on Sunday nights, when Alax was 
off and the girls dined on thick sandwiches, Kate sen^d supper 
for two in Faye’s room. It was a pleasant and a ladylike time. 
There was always some little delicacy', very special and good - 
foie gras or a tossed salad, pastry’ bouglit at Lang’s Bakery just 
across Main Street. And instead of tlie white oilcloth and paper 
napkins of the dining-room, Faye’s table was covered with a 
white damask cloth and the napkins were linen. It had a party 
feelirig, too, candles and ~ something rare in Salinas - a bowl of 
flowers. Kate could make pretty floral arrangements using only 
the blossoms from weeds she picked in the fields. 

‘What a clever girl she is,’ Faye would say. ‘She can do any- 
thing and she can make do with antthing. Wc’rc going to 
Europe, And did you know Kate speaks French? Well, she can. 
When you get her alone, ask her to say something in Frcmch. 
She’s teaching me. Know how you say bread in French?’ Faye 
was having a wonderful time, Kate gave her excitement and 
perpetual planning. 


IV 


n Saturday the fourteenth of October the first wild ducks went 
o\er Salinas. Faye saw them from her window, a great wedge 
ymg south. When Kate came in before supper, as she alv.’ays 
euess the winter’s nearly here,’ she 

¦D j Stoves.’ 

Heady for your tonic, Mother dear?’ 

Yes, I am. You’re making me lazj', waiting on me.’ 

235 



¦ ‘I like to wait on you,’ said Kate. She took the bottle of Lydia 
Pinkham’s Vegetable Compound from the dratver and held it up 
to the light;/Not much left/ she said. ‘We’ll have to get some 
more.’ 

‘Oh, I tliink I have three bottles left of the dozen in my' 
closet.’ _ 

Kate picked up tlie glass. ‘There’s a fly in the glass/ she said. 
‘I’ll just go and wash it out.’ , ' 

In the kitchen she rinsed the glass. From her pocket she took 
the eye-dropper. The end was closed with a little piece of 
potato, the way you plug the spout of a kerosene can. She care- 
fully squeezed a few drops of clear liquid into the glass, a tinc- 
ture of nux vomica. ... 

, Back in Faye’s room she poured the three tablespoons of vege- 
table compound in the glass and stirred it. 

Faye drank her tonic and licked her lips. ‘It tastes bitter,’ she 
said. ¦ 

‘Does it, dear? Let me taste.’ Kate took a spoonful from the 
bottle and made a face. ‘So it does/ she said._‘I guess it’s been 
standing around too long. I’m going to throw it out. Say, that 
is bitter. Let me get you a glass of water.’ 

At supper Faye’s face was flushed. She stopped eating and 
seemed to be listening. 

‘¦What’s the matter?’ Kate asked. ‘Mother, what’s the matter?’ 

. Faye seemed to tear her attention away. ‘Why, I don’t know. 
I guess a little heart flutter. Just' all of a sudden I felt afraid and 
my heart got to' pounding.’ ¦ ' , . 

‘Don’t you \yant me to help you to your room?’ 

‘No, dear, I feel all right now.’ - 

Grace put down her fork. ‘Well, you got a real high flush, 
Faye.’ 

Kate said, ‘I don’t like it. I wish you’d see Dr Wilde.’ 

‘No, it’s all right now.’ 

‘You frightened me,’ said Kate. ‘Have you ever had it before?’ 

‘Well, I’m a little short of breath sometimes. I guess I’m get- 
ting too stout.’ 

Faye didn*t feel very good that Saturday night, and about ten 
o’clock Kate persuaded her to go to bed. Kate looked in several 
times imtil she was sure Faj^e was asleep. 

The ne.vt day Faye felt all right. ‘I guess I’m just short- 
winded/ she said. 

‘Well, we’re going to have invalid food for my darling/ said 
Kate. ‘I’ve made some chicken soup for you and we’ll have a 

• 236 




‘Go out and break every ' jar,’ Dr Wilde said.- ‘Goddam the ¦ 

string' be^s !’ And he unpacked liis stomach pump. - ¦ ' 

On . Tuesday he sat wth two pale weak women. Kate’s b^ ; 
bad been moved into Faye’s room. ‘I can tell you now,’ he said, 

‘I didn’t think you had a chance. You’re pretty lucky.. And let 
home-made string beans alone. Buy canned ones.’ . . 

*¦ ‘What is it?’ Kate-asked. , - ¦ 

‘Botulism. We don’t know much about it, but damn few ever . 
get - oyer. it. I guess it’s because you’re young and she’s tough.’ 
He asked Faye, ‘Are you still bleeding frfam the bowels?’ 

‘Yes, a little.’ . ' ’ , 

- ‘Well,' here are some morphine pills. They’ll bind you up. 
Y'ou’ve probably ruptured something. But they say you can’t kill 
a whore. Now take it easy, both of you.’ 

That was October 17. 

. Faye was never really well again: She would make a little gain 
and Aen go to pieces. She had a bad time on December. 3,' and 
it took even long» for her to gain her strength. February 12 the 
bleeding became, violent and the. strain seemed to have weakened 
Faye’s heart, Dr Wilde listened a long time through his stetho- 
scope. . ¦ • 

¦; Kate was haggard and her slender body had shrunk to bones. 
The girls tried to spell her with Faye, but Kate woidd hot Irave. 

Grace said, ‘God knows when’s .the last sleep she had. If Faye 
was to die, I think it would kiU that girl.’ 

•She’s just as like to blow her brains out,’ said Ethel. 

¦ Dr Wilde, took Kate into the . day-darkened parlour , and put 
his black bag on the, chair. ‘I might as well tell you,’, he said. 
¦Her heart just can’t stand the strain. I’m afraid. She’s all torn 
up inside. That goddam bomUsm. Worse than a rattlesnake.’ He 
looked away from Kate’s haggard face. ‘I thought it would be 
better to tell you so you can prepare yourself,’ he said lamely, 

¦ and put his hand on her bony shoulder. ‘Not many people, have 
such loyalty. Give her a littk warih milk if she can take it.’ 

• Kate carried a basin of .warni water to the table beside the bed. 

. When Trixie looked in, Kate was bathing Faye and using, the 
fine- linen napkins to do it. Then she brushed thelank blonde 
hair and braided it. ¦ - ' ' - 

- Faye’s skin had shrunk, clinging to jaw and skull, and her 
eyes were huge and vacant. 

, She tried to speak, and Kate said, ‘Shush ! Save your strength. 
Save your strength.’ , 

She went to the kitchen for a glass of warm milk and put it on 

- ¦ ' ¦ . 238 ¦ ' ¦, ¦ 



the bedside table. She took two little bottles from her pocket and 
sucked a little from each into the eye-dropper. ‘Open up. 
Mother. This is a new kind of medicine. Now be brave, dear. 
This will taste bad.’ She squeezed the fluid far back on Faye’s 
tongue and held up her head so she could drink a little milk to 
take away the taste. ‘Now you rest and I’ll be'back in a little 
while.’ 

Kate slipped quietly out of the room. The kitchen was dark. 
She opened the outer door and crept out and moved back among 
the weeds. The groimd was damp from the spring rains. At the 
back of the lot she dug a small hole with a pointed stick. She 
dropped in a number of small thin bottles and an eye-dropper. 
With the stick she crushed the glass to bits and scraped the dirt 
over them. Rain was beginning to fall as Kate went back to the 
house. 

At first they had to tie Kate down to keep her from hurting 
herself. From violence she went into a gloomy stupor. It was a 
long time before she regained her health. And she forgot com- 
pletely about the will. It was Trixie who finally remembered. 


•CHAPTER 22 

I 

On the Trask place Adam drew into himself. The unfinished 
Sanchez house lay open to wind and rain, and the new floor- 
boards buckled and warped with moistiure. The laid-out vege- 
table gardens rioted with weeds. 

Adam seemed clothed in a viscosity that slowed his move- 
ments and held his thoughts down. He saw the world through 
grey water. Now and then his mind fought its way upwards, 
and when the light broke in it bipught him only a sickness of the 
mind, and he retired into the greyness again. He was aware of 
the tvdns because -he heard them cry and laugh, but he felt only 
a thin distaste for them. -To Adam they were symbols of his loss. 
His neighbomrs drove up into his little valley, and every one of 
them would have understood anger or sorrow -and so helped 
' him. But they could do nothing with the cloud that hung over 
him. Adam did not resist them. He simply did not see them, and 
before -long the, neighbours stopped driving up the road under 
the oaks. 


239 



For a time Lee tried to stimulate Adam to awareness, but Lee 
was a busy. man. He cooked and washed, he bathed tlie tw'ins 
and fed thra. Through his hard and constant- work he grew, 
fond of th& two little boys. He talked to them in Cantonese, and 
Chinese words were the first they recognized and tried to repeat. 

Samuel Hamilton went back twice to try to wedge Adam up 
and out of his shock. Then Liza stepped in. , 

¦ ‘I want you to stay away from there,’ she said. ‘You come, 
back a changed man. Samuel, you don’t change him. He changes 
you. I can see the look of him. in your face.’ 

‘Have you thought of the two little boys, Liza?’ he asked. 

‘I’ve thought of your, own family,’ she said snappishly. ‘You*’ 
lay a crepe on us for days after.’ . 

lAU - right. Mother,’ he said, but it saddened him, because 
Samuel could not mind his own business when there was pain 
in any man. It was no easy thing for him to abandon Adam to 
his desolation. 

Adam had paid him for his work, had even paid him for the 
' windmill parts and did not want the windmills. Samuel sold the 
equipment and sent Adam the money. He had no answer. 

. He became aware of an anger at Adam Trask. It seemed to 
Samuel that Adam might be pleasuring himself with sadness.. 
But there was little leisure to brood. Joe was o5 to college -to 
that school Leland Stanford had built on his farm near Palo 
Alto. Tom worried his father, for Tom grew deeper and deeper 
.'into books. He did his work well enough, but Samuel felt. that 
t-Tom had not joy enough. 

¦-\Will and George were doing well in business, and Joe was 
riting letters home in rhymed verse and making as smart an 
, ttack on all the accepted verities as was healthful. 

¦ Samuel wrote to Joe, saying, ‘I would be disappointed if .you 
had not become an atheist, and I read pleasantly that you have, 

. in j'bur age and wisdom, accepted agnosticism the way you’d- 
, take a cookie on a full stomach. But I would ask you with all 
my understanding heart not to try to convert your mother. Your 
last letter only made her think you are not well. Your rhother 
does not believe there are many ills incurable by good strong 
soup. She puts your brave attack on the structure of civilization 
down to a stomach-ache. It worries her. Her faith is a mountain, ' 
and you, my son, haven’t even got a shovel yet.’ 

Liza was getting old. Samuel saw it in her face, and he could 
not feel old himself, white beard or no. But Liza was living 
backwards, and that’s the proof. 

'240 . . 


There was a time when she looked on his plans and prophecies 
as the crazy shoutings of a child. Now she felt that they were 
unseemly in a grown man. They three, Liza and Tom and 
Samuel, were alone on the ranch, Una was married to a stranger 
and gone away. Dessie had her dressmaking business in Salinas. 
Olive had married her young man and MoUie was married and 
• living, believe it or not, in an apartment in San Francisco, There 
Nvas perfume, and a white bearskin rug in the bedroom in front 
of the fireplace, and Mollie smoked a gold-tipped cigarene- 
Violet Milo -with her coffee after dinner. 

One day Samuel strained his back lifting a bale of hay, and it 
hurt his feelings more than his back, for he could not imagine a 
life in which Sam Hamilton was not privileged to lift a bale of 
hay. He felt insulted by his back, almost as he would have been 
if one of his children had been dishonest. 

In King City, Dr Tilson felt him over. The doctor grew more 
testy with his overworked years. 

‘You sprained your back.’^ 

‘That.I did,’ said Samuel. 

‘And you drove all the way in to have me tell you that you 
sprained your back and charge you two dollars?’ 

‘Here’s your two dollars.’ 

'And you want to know what to do about it?’ 

‘Sure I do.’ 

‘Don’t sprain it any more. Now take your money back. You’re 
not a fool, Samuel, unless you’re getting childish.’ 

‘But it hurts.’ 

‘Of course it hurts. How would you know it was strained if it 
didn’t?’ 

^Samuel laughed. ‘You’re good for me,’ he said. ‘You’re more 
than two dollars good for me. Keep the money,’ 

The doctor looked closely at him. ‘I thinlt you’re telling the 
truth, Samuel. I’lrkeep the money.’ 

Samuel went in to see Will in his fine new store. He hardly 
knew his son, for Will was getting fat and prosperous and he 
wore a coat and waistcoat and a gold ring on his little finger. 

. 'I’ve got a package made up for Mother,’ Will said. ‘Some 
little cans of things from France. Mushrooms and liver paste 
and sardines so little you can hardly see them.’ 

‘She’ll just send them to Joe,’ said Samuel. 

‘Can’t you make her eat them?’ 

_ ‘No,’ ,said his father. ‘But she’ll enjoy sending them to 
Joe. 


241 . 



' Lee came into the store and his eyes lighted up. 'How do. 
Missy,’ he said.' ‘ 

‘Hello, Lee. How are the boys?’ - 

‘Boys fine.’ ¦ • ' 

Samuel said, ‘I’m going to have a glass of beer next door, Lee.- 
Be glad to have you join me.’ ' ' 

. Lee and Samuel sat at the little rotmd table in the bar-room 
and. Samuel drew figures on the scrubbed wood with the mois-, 
.ture off his beer glass. ‘I’ve wanted to go and see you and . 
Adam, but I didn’t think I could do any good.’ . 

. ‘NVell, you can’t do any harm. I thought he’d get over it. But 
be still walks around like a ghost.’ 

' -It’s over a year, isn’t it?’ Samuel asked. 

‘Three months over.’ 

‘Well, what do you think I can do?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Lee. ‘Maybe yoii could shock him out of 
it. Nothing else has worked.’ 

‘I’m not good at shocking. I’d probably end up by shocking 
myself. By the way, what did he name the twins?’ , 

‘They don’t have any names.’ 

. ‘You’re making a joke, Lee.’ 

‘I am not making jokes.’ 

'What does he call them?’ 

‘He caUs them “they”.’ 

‘I mean when he speaks to them.’ 

¦ ‘When he speaks to them he calls them “you”, one or both.’ 
‘This is nonsense,’ Samuel said angrily. ‘What kind of a -fool 
is the man?’ 

^ ‘I've meant to come and tell you. He’s a dead man unless you 
an wake him up.’ 

/ • Samuel said, ‘I’ll come. I’ll bring a horse-whip. No names! 
You’re damn right I’ll come, Lee.’ 

• ‘When?’ 

‘Tomorrow.’ 

‘I’ll kill a chicken,’ said Lee. ‘You’ll like the twins, Mr Hamil- 
ton. They’re fine-looking boys. I won’t tell Mr Trask you’re 
coming.’ , 

, - It 

. Shyly Samuel told his wife he wanted to visit the Trask place. 
He thought she would.pile up strong walls of objection, and for 
one of the few times in his life fie would disobey her wish no 
matter how strong her objection. It gave him a sad feeling in the 

242 



stomach to think of disobeying his wife. He explained his pur- 
ose almost as though he were confessing, Liza put her hands on 
er hips during the telling and his heart sank. When he was 
nished she continued to Idok at him, he thought, coldly. 

Finally she said, ‘Samuel, do you think you can move this 
ock of a man?’ 

‘Why, I don’t know. Mother.’ He had not expected this. ‘I 
ion’t Imow.’ _ • 

‘Do you think it is such an important matter that those babies 
lave names right now?’ 

‘Well, it seemed so to me,’ he said lamely. 

‘Samuel, do you think why you want to go? Is it your natural 
incurable nosiness? Is it your black inability to mind your own 
business?’ 

‘Now, Liza, I know my failings pretty well. I thought it might 
be more than that.’ 

‘It had better be more than that,’ she said. ‘This man has not 
admitted that his sons live. He has cut them off mid-air.’ 

‘That’s the way it seems to me, Liza.’ 

‘If he tells you to mind your own business -what then?’ 

‘Well, I don’t know.’ 

Her jaw snapped shut and her teeth clicked. ‘If you do not get 
those boys named; there’ll be no warm place in this house for 
you. Don’t you dare come whining back, saying he wouldn’t do 
it or he wouldn’t listen. If you do I’ll have to go myself.’ 

‘I’ll give him the back of my hand,’ Samuel said. 

‘No, that you won’t do. You fall short in savagery, Samuel. I 
know you. You’ll give him sweet-sounding words and you’ll 
come dragging back and try "to make me forget you ever went.’ 
‘I’ll beat his brains out,’ Samuel shouted. 

He slammed into the bedroom, and Liza smiled at the panels. 
He came out soon in his black suit and his hard shiny shirt 
and pilar. He stooped down to her while she tied his black 
string tie. His white beard was brushed to shining. 

‘You’d best take a swab at your shoes with a blacking brush,’ 
she said. 

In the midst of painting the blacking on his worn shoes he 
looked sideways up at her. ‘Could I take the Bible along?’ he 
asked. ‘There’s no place for getting a good name like the Bible.’ 

‘I don’t much like it out of the house,’ she said imeasily. ‘And 
if you’re late coming home, what’ll I have for my reading? And 
Ae children’s names are in itl’ She saw his face fall. She went 
into the bedroom and came back with a small Bible, worn and 



scuffed, its' cover held on, by brown paper and glue. ‘Take this 
oiie,’ she said. 

‘But that’s your mother’s.’ 

‘She wouldn’t mind. And all the names but one, in here ha-ve 
two dates.’ 

, , ‘I’ll wrap it so it won’t get hurt,’ said Samuel. - 

Liza spoke sharply, ‘What my mother would;mind is what I 
mind, and I’ll tell you what I mind. You’re never, satisfied to let 
the Testament alone. You’re for ever picking at it and question- 
ing it. You mrn it over the way a ’coon turns over a wet rock, 

¦ and it angers me.’, ' - ' 

‘I’m -just trying to understand it. Mother.’ 

‘Wlmt is there to understand? 'Just read it. There it is in 
, black and white.' Who wants you to understand it? If the, Lord 
God wanted you to understand it He’d -have given you to under- 
stand or He’d have set it down different.’ 

‘But, Mother-^’ 

¦ ‘Samuel,’ she said, ‘you’re the most contentious man this 
world has ever seen.’ - ' ' 

.‘Yes, Motlier.’ 

‘Don’t agree with me all the time. It hints of insincerity. 
Speak up for yourself.’ 

She looked after his dark figure in the buggy as he drove 
away. ‘He’s a stveet husband,’ she said aloud, ‘but contentious.’ 

And Samuel was thinking with wonder, ‘Just when I think I 
¦know her she does a thing like that.’ ¦, 

‘ III , , - 

On the last half-mile, turning out of the Salinas Valley and driv- 
ing up the unscraped road under the great oak trees, Samuel , 
tried to plait a rage to take care of his embatrassment. He said 
heroic words to himself. 

Adam was more gaunt than Samuel remembered. His eyes 
were dull, as though he did not use them much for seeing. It 
took a little time for Adam to become aware that Samuel was 
standing before liim. A grimace of displeasure drew down his 
mouth. 

. Samuel said, ‘I feel small now - coming uninvited as I have.’ . 

Adam said, ‘What do you want? Didn’t I pay you?’ 

‘Pay?’ Samuel asked. ‘Yes, you did. Yes, by God, you did. ' 
And I’ll tell you that pay has been more than I’ve merited by the"' . 
nature of it.’ . ' 


-244 



‘What? What are you trying to say?’ 

Samuel’s anger grew and put out leaves. ‘A man, his whole 
life, matches himself against pay. And how, if it’s my whole 
life’s work to find my worth, can you, sad man, write me down . 
instant in a ledger?’ 

Adam exclaimed, ‘I’U pay. I tell you I’ll pay. How much? I’ll 
pay.’ 

‘You have, but not to me.’ 

•Why did you come, then? Go away ! ’ 

‘You once invited me.’ 

‘I don’t invite you now.’ 

Samuel put his hands on his hips and leaned forward. ‘I’ll tell 
you now, quiet. In a bitter night, a mustard night that was last - 
night, a good thought came and the dark was sw^eetened when 
the day sat down. And this thought went from evening star to 
the late dipper on the edge of the first light -that our betters 
spoke of. So I invite myself.’ 

‘You are not welcome.’ 

Samuel said, ‘I’m told that out of some singular glory your 
loins got twins.’ 

'What business is that of yours?’ 

A kind of joy h'ghted Samuel’s eyes at the rudeness. He saw 
Lee lurking inside the house and peeking out at him. ‘Don’t, for 
the love of God, put violence on me. I’m a man hopes there’ll be 
a picture of peace on my hatchments.’ 

‘I don’t understand you.’ 

"How could 5 'ou? Adam Trask, a dog-wolf with a pair of 
cubs, a scrubby rooster with sweet paternity for a fertilized egg! 
A dirty clod!’ 

A darkness covered Adam’s cheeks and for the first time his 
eyK seaned to see. Samuel joyously felt hot rage in his stomach. 
He cried, ‘Oh, my friend, retreat from me ! Please, I beg of you 1 ’ 
The saliva dampened the comers of his mouth. ‘Please!’ he 
cned. ‘For the love of any holy thing you can remember, step 
. bsek from me. I feel murder nudging my gizzard.’ 

Adam said, ‘Get off my place. Go on — get off. You’re acting 
crazy. Get off. This is my place, I bought it.’ 

.‘You bought your eyes and nose,’ Samuel jeered. ‘You bought 
your uprighmess. You bought your thumb on sideways. Listen 
to me, because I’m like to kill you after. You bought! You 
bought out of some, sweet inheritance. Think now— do you de- 
serve your children, man?’ 


245 



. ‘Deserve them?. They’re, here— I, guess. I ; don t understand 

you.’ ¦ . • - 

Samuel wailed,' ‘God save me,.Li 2 a! It’s not the way you , 
think, Adam !' Listen to me before my thumb finds the bad place 
•at your throat. The“ precious ttvins - untried, unnoticed, un- 
directed - and , I < say . it quiet , with my hands down-undis-\ 
covered.’ , . 

‘Get off,’ said Adam hoarsely. ‘L^,. bring a gun! TWs man 
. is crazy. Lee 1 ’ . , 

Then Samuel’s hands were on Adam’s throat, pressing the 
throbbing up to his temples, swelling his eyes with blood. And 
i-Samuel was snarling at him., ‘Tear away with.your jelly fingers. , 
Yoii have not bought these boys, not stolen them, nor passed any , . 
bit for them. You have them by some strange and lovely dis- 
pensation.’ . Suddenly he plucked his hard thumbs out of his - 
neighbour’s throat. : . 

Adam stood panting. He felt his throat where the blacksmith’s 
• hands had been. ‘'What is it you want of me?’ 

‘You have no love.’ 

' ‘I had - enough to kill me.’ ' ' ¦ 

¦ . ‘No one ever had enough. The stone orchard celebrates too 
' little, not too much.’ 

, ‘Stay away from me. I can fight back. Don’t think I can’t 
defend myself.’ 

,‘You have two weapons, and they not named.’ 

‘I’ll fight you, old man. You are an old man.’ 

Samuel said, ‘I can’t think in my mind of a dull man jjicking ¦ 
up a rock, who before evening would not put a name to it - like 
Peter. And you - for a year you’ve lived with your heart’s; drain- ' 

¦ ing and you’ve not even laid a number to the boys.’- 

Adam said, ‘What I do is my own business.’ 

Samuel struck him with a work-heavy fist, and Adam sprawled , 
in the dust. Samuel asked him to rise, and vVhen Adam accepted 
struck him again', and this time Adam did not get up'. He looked 
stonily at the menacing old man. - , , 

The fire went out of Samuel’s eyes and he said qiiietly, ‘Your 
sons have no names.’ ' • 

Adam replied, ‘Their mother' left them motherless.’ 

‘And you have left them fatherless. Can’t you feel the cold at, , 
night of a lone child? What warm is tliere, what bird song, what ' 
possible morning can be good? Don’t you remember, Adam, 
how it was, even a little?’ ¦ . . 

‘I didn’t do it,’ Adam said.' : , 

• ' ’ ' 246 , 


‘Have you undone it? Your boys have no names.’ He stooped 
down and put his arms around Adam’s shoulders and helped 
him to his feet ‘We’ll give them names,’ he said. ‘We’ll think 
long and find good names to clothe them.’ He whipped the dust 
from Adam’s shirt with his hands. 

Adam wore a far-away yet intent look, as though he were ' 
h’stening to some wind-carried music, but his eyes were not dead 
as they had been. He said, ‘It’s hard to imagine I’d thank a man 
for insults and for shaking me out like a rug. But I’m grateful. 
It’s a huxty thanks, but it’s thanks.’ 

Samuel smiled, crinkle-eyed. ‘Did it seem natural? Did I do 
it right?’ he asked. 

.. ‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Well, in a way I promised my wife I’d do it. She didn’t be- 
lieve I would. I’m not -a fighting man, you see. The last time I 
clobbered a human soul it was over a red-nosed girl and a 
schoolbook in Coimty Deny^’ 

4idam stared at Samuel, but in his mind he saw and felt his 
brother Charles, black and murderous, and that sight switched 
to Cathy and the quality of her eyes over the gun-barrd. ‘There 
wasn’t any fear in it,’ Adam said, ‘it was more like a weariness.’ 

‘I guess I was not angry enough.’ 

'‘Samuel, I’ll ask you just once and then no more. Have you 
heard anything? Has there been any news of her -any news at 
all?’ 

‘I’ve heard nothing.’ 

‘It’s almost a relief,’ said Adam. 

- ‘Do you have hatred?’ 

. ‘No. No -only a kind of sinking in the heart. Maybe later I’ll 
sort it out to hatred. There was no interval from loveliness to 
¦ horror, you see. I’m confused, confused.’ 

Samuel said, ‘One day we’ll sit and you’ll lay it out on the 
table, neat like a solitaire deck, but now - why, you can’t find all 
the cards.’ 

From behind the shed there came the indignant shrieking of 
. an outraged £hicken and then a dull thump. 

‘There’s something at the hens,' said Adam. 

A second shrieking started. ‘It’s Lee at the hens,’ said Samuel. 
You know, if chickens had government and church and history, 
they would take a. distant and distasteful view of human joy. Let 
®tty gay and hopeful thing happen to a man, and some chicken 
goes howling to the block.’ 

Now, the two men were silent, breaking it only with small 

247 



false courtesies — meaningless inguirics about health and weather, - 
with answers unlistened to. And this might have continued until 
they were angry at each other again if Lee had not interfered. , , 

Lee brought out a table and two chairs and set the chairs fac- 
-ing each other; He made another trip for a pint of whislcy and 
two glasses and set a glass on the table in front of each chair. 
Then he carried out the twins, one under , each arm; and put 
them on the ground beside the table and gave each boy a stick 
for his hand to .shake 'and make shadows with. 

The boys sat solemnly and looked about, stared at Samuel’s 
beard and searched for Lee. The strmge thing about them was 
tlieir clothing, for the boys were dressed in the straight trousers 
. and the frogged and braided jackets of the Chinese. One was in 
turquoise blue and the other in a faded rose pink, and the frogs 
and braid were black. On their heads sat round black silken hats, 
each with a bright red button on its flat top. 

Samuel asked, “Where in the world did you get those clothes, 
Lee?’ ¦ - 

‘I ¦ didn’t get them,’ Lee said testily. ‘I had them. The only 
other clothes they have I made myself, out of sail-cloth. A boy 
should be well dressed on his naming day.’ 

‘You’ve dropped the pidgin, Lee.’ 

‘I hope for good. Of course, I use it in King City.’ He ad- 
dressed a few short sung syllables to the boys on the ground; 
Mid they both smiled up at him and waved their sticks in the air. 
Lee said, ‘I’ll pour you a drink. It’s some that was here.’ 

‘It’s some you bought yesterday in King City,’ said Samuel. 

Now that Samuel and Adam were seated together and the 
barriers were down, a curtain of shyness fell on Samuel. What 
he had beaten in with his fists he could not supplement easily. 

¦ He thought of the virtues of courage and forbearance, which be- 
came flabby when there is nothing to use them on. His mind 
grinned inward at itself. ' , ' 

The two sat looking at the twin boys in their strange, bright- 
coloured clothes. Samuel thought, ‘Sometimes your opponent 
can help you more than your friend.’ He lifted his ej^es to Adam. 

“It’s hard to start,’ he said, ‘And it’s like a put-oS letter that 
gathers difficulties to itself out of the minutes. Could you giv^e 
me a hand?’ 

Adam looked up for a moment and then back at the boys on 
the ground. ‘There’s a crashing in my head,’ he said, ‘Like 
sounds you hear under water. J’m having to dig myself out of a 
year.’. , 


248 



‘Maybe you’ll tell me how it was and that will get us started.’ ¦ 
Adam tossed down his drink and poured anothw and rolled 
the glass at an angle in his hand. The amber whisky mwed 
high on the side and the pungent fruit odour of its warming 
filled the air. ‘It’s hard to remember,’ he said, ‘It was not agony . 
but a dullness. But no - there were needles in it. You said I had 
30t all the cards in the deck -and I was thinking of that. Maybe 
[’ll never-have all the cards.’ 

‘Is it herself trying to come out? When a tnan says he does 
aot want to speak of something he usually means he can think 
af nothing else.’ 

‘Maybe it’s that. She’s all mixed up with the dullness, and I 
can’t remember much except the last picture drawn in fire.’ 

‘She did shoot you, didn’t she, Adam?’ 

His lips grew thin and his eyes black. 

. Samuel said, ‘There’s no need to answer.’ 

‘There’s no reason not to,’ Adam replied. ‘Yes, she did.’ 

‘Did she mean to kiU you?’ 

‘I’ve thought of that more than anything else. No, I don’t 
think she meant to kill me. She didn’t allow me that dignity. 
There was no hatred in her, no passion at all. I learned about 
that in the army. If you want to kill a man, you shoot at head 
or heart or stomach. No, she hit me where she intended. I can 
see the gim-barrel moving over. I guess I wouldn’t have minded 
so much if she had wanted my death. That would have been a 
kind of love. But I was an annoyance, not an enemy.’ 

You’ve given it a lot of thought,’ said Samuel. 

‘I’ve had lots of time for it. I want to ask you something. I 
can’t remember behind the last ugly thing. Was she very beauti- 
ful, Samuel?’ 

‘To you she was because you built her. I don’t think you ever 
saw her -only your own creation.’ 

Adam mused aloud, ‘I wonder who she was - what she was. I 
TOs content not to know.’ 

‘And now you want to?’ 

Adam dropped his eyes. ‘It’s not curiosity. But I would like to 
know what knd of blood is in my boys. When they grow up - 
won’t I be looking for something in them?’ 

‘Yes, you will. And I will warn you now that not their blood 
but your suspicion might build evil in them. They will be what 
you-expectof them.’ 

‘But their blood — ’ 

‘I don’t very much beh’e^'e in blood,’ said Samuel, ‘I think 

249 



¦when a , man hnds good or bad in his childreii he is seeing only 
what he planted in them after they'clcared the womb.’ 

' 'You can’t make a racehorse of a pig.’ , . . . ; 

; .‘No/ said Samuel, .‘but :you can' make a very' fast pig.’ ' 

,4 .‘No one hereabouts would agree with you. I think even Mrs 
^Hamilton would not.’ ' . ' ¦ ' 

-‘That’s exactly right, She most of all would disagree, and so I 
would not say it to her and let loose the thunder of her dis- 
agreement. She wins ail argurnents by the use of vehemence and 
the conviction that a difference of topinion is a personal affront. 
She’s a fine woman, but you have to learn to feel your way with 
her; Let’s sp<ak of the boys.’ ' ¦ . ' 

¦ ‘Will you have another drink?’ ' . - - 

'That I will, thank you. Names are a great mystery. I’ve never 
known whether the name is moulded by the child or the child 
changed .to fit the name. But you can be sure of this - whenever 
a human has a nickname it is a proof that the name given him 
was wrong. How do you favour the standard names — John or 
James or Charles?’ 

. Adam was looking at the twins and suddenly with the men- 
tion of the name he saw his brother peering out of Ae eyes of 
one of the boys. He leaned forward. '¦ 

‘¦What is it?’ Samuel asked. 

‘Why,’ Adam cried, ‘these boys are not alike! They don’t look 
alike.’ 

‘Of course they don’t. They’re not identical twins.’ - ' ¦ 

‘That one- Aat one looks like my brother. I just saw it. I 
wonder if the other looks like me.’ ' . 

‘Both of Aem do. A face has everything in it right back to the 
beginning.’ 

‘It’s not so much now,’ said Adam. ‘But for a moment I 

¦ thought I was seeing a ghost.’ 

. ‘Maybe Aat’s what ghosts are,’ Samuel observed. . . ' ' 

Lee brought dishes out and put Aem on Ae table. 

‘Do you have Chinese ghosts?’ Samuel asked. 

‘Millions,’ said Lee. ‘We have more ghosts Aan anything else. 

: I guess nothing in China ever dies. It’s very crowded. Anyway, 

¦ that’s the feeling I got when I was Aere.’ . . v ¦ 

Samuel said, ‘Sit down, Lee. We’re trying to think of 
names.’ 

. ‘I’ve got chicken frying. It will be ready pretty soon.’ . 

Adam, looked up from Ae twins and Ifis eyes were warmed 
and softened. ‘Will yoii have a drink, Lee?’ 

¦ . , 250 .’, / - ’ ¦ 


Tm nipping at the ng-ka-py in the kitchen,’ said Lee and 
'ent back to the house.’ 

Samuel leaned down and gathered up one of the boys and 
eld him on' his lap. ‘Take that one up,’ he said to Adam. ‘We 
ught to see whether there’s something that draws names to 
hem.’ 

Adam held the other child awkwardly on his knee. ‘They look 
ome. alike,’ he said, ‘but not when you look close. This one has 
ounder eyes than that one.’ 

‘Yes, and a rounder head and bigger ears,’ Samuel added. ‘But 
his one is more like - like a bullet. This one might go farther 
)Ut not so high. And this one is going to be darker in the hair 
ind skin. This one will be shrewd, I think, and shrewdness is a 
limitation on the mind. Shrewdness tells you what you must not 
io because it would not be slirewd. See how this one supports 
himself! He’s farther along than that one -better developed. 
Isn’t it strange how different they are when you look close?’ . 

Adam’s face was changing as though he had opened and come 
out on his surface. He held up his finger, and the child made a 
lunge for it and missed and nearly fell off his lap. ‘Whoa 1 ’ said 
Adam. ‘Take it easy. Do you want to fall?’ 

¦ ‘It would be a mistake to name them for qualities we think 
they have,’ Samuel said. ’We might be wrong - so tvrong. Maybe 
it would be good to give them a high mark to shoot at - a name 
to live up to. The man I’m named after had his name called clear 
by the Lord God, and I’ve been listening all my life. And once 
or twice I’ve thought I heard my name called - but not clear, 
not clear.’ 

Adam, holding the child by his upper arm, leaned over and 
poured whisky in both glasses. ‘I thank you for coming, Samuel,’ 
he said. ‘I even thank you for hitting me. That’s a strange thing 
to say.’ 

'It was a strange thing for me to do. Liza will never believe it, 
and so FU never tell her. An unbelieved truth can hurt a man 
much more than a lie. It takes great courage to back truth un- 
acceptable to our times. There’s a punishment for it, and it’s 
usually crucifixion. I haven’t the courage for that.’ 

Adam said, ‘I’ve wondered why a man of your knowledge 
would work a desert hill place.’ 

It’s because I haven’t courage,’ said Samuel. ‘I could never 
Quite take the responsibility. When the Lord God did not call 
¦uiy name, I might have called His name — but I did not. There 
jou have the difference between greatness and mediocrity. It’s 

251 



’ not an uncommon disease. But it’s nice for a mediocre man to 
foow that'greamess must be the loneliest state in' the world.’ / 

“ ,, ‘I’d thinh there are degrees of greatness/ Adam said. ' , ¦ 

¦ 'I don’t think so,’, said Samuel. ‘That would be like saprig 
-there -is a little bigness. No. I believe when, you come to, that 
responsibility the hugeness and j’ou are alone to make your 
choice. On one side you- have warmth and companionship and 
sweet understanding, and on the other -cold, lonely grrath^s. 
There you make your choice. I’m glad I chose mediocrity, but 
how am I . to say-what reward might have come with tlie other? 
None of my children will be great either, except perhaps Tom. 
^.He’s suffering over the choosing right now. It’s a painful thing 
to watch. And somewhere in me I want him to say ,yes. Isn’t that 
strange? A'father to want his son condemned to greatness! What 
selfishness that must be.’ 

, Adam chuckled. ‘This naming is no simple' business, I 
see.’ - 

‘Did you think it would be?’ 

‘I didn’t know it could be so pleasant,’ said Adam. 

Lee came out with a platter of fried chicken, a bowl of smok- 
ing boiled potatoes, and a deep dish of pickled beets, all carried 
• on a pastry board.^‘I don’t know how good it will be,’ he said. 
‘The hens are a little old. We don’t have any pullets. The 
weasels got the baby chicks this year.’ : . 

‘Pull up,’ said Samuel. 

‘Wait until I get my ng-ka-py,’ said Lee. ' , 

While he was gone Adam said, ‘It’s strange to me -he used 
to speak differently.’ 

‘He trusts you now,’ Samuel said. ‘He has a gift of resigned 
loyalty without hope of reward. He’s maybe a much better man 
, than either of us could dream of being.’ . 

Lee came back and took his seat at the end of the table. ‘Just 
put the boys on the ground,’ he said. 

The twins protested when they were set down. Lee spoke to 
them sharply in Cantonese and they were silent. ", 

The men ate quietly as nearly all country peoplc.do. Suddenly 
Lee got up and hurried into the house. He came back with a jug 
of red. wine. ‘I forgot it,’ he said. ‘I found it in the house’ 

Adam laughed. ‘I remember drinking wine .here before.!.' 
bought tlie place. Maybe I bought the place because of the wine., 
The chicken’s good, Lee. I don’t think I’ve been atvare of the 
taste of food for a long time.’ ' „ 

‘You’re getting welli’ Samuel said. 'Some people think it’s an 

252 


insult to the glory of their sickness to get well. But the tinie 
poultice is no respecter of glories. Everyone gets well if he waits 
around.’ , ' 


IV 


Lee cleared the table and gave each of the boys a clean drum- 
stick. They sat solemnly holding their greasy batons and altern- 
ately inspecting and sucking them. The wine and' the glasses 
stayed on the table. 

‘We’d best='get on with the naming,’ Samuel said. ‘I can feel a 
little tightening on my halter from Liza.’ 

‘I can’t think what to name them,* Adam said. 

‘You have no family name you want - no inviting trap for a 
rich relative, no proud name to re-create?’ 

, ‘No, I’d like them to start'fresh, in so far as that is possible.’ 

Samuel knocked his , forehead with his knuckles. ‘What a 
shame,’ he said. ‘What a shame it is that the proper names for 
them they cannot have.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ Adam asked. 

. ‘Freshness, you said. I thought last night — ’ He paused. 
‘Have you thought of your own name?’ 

. ‘Mine?’ 

‘Of course. Your first-born - Cain and Abel.’ 

Adam said, ‘Oh, no. No, we can’t do that.’ 

‘I know we can’t. That would be tempting whatever fate there 
is. But isn’t it odd that Cain is maybe the best-known name in 
the whole world and as far as I know only one man has ever 
borne it?’ ¦ , 

Lee said, ‘Maybe that’s why the name has- never changed its 
emphasis.’ . . 

Adam looked into the inlt-red wine in his glass. I got a shiver 


hen you mentioned it,’ he said. 

‘Two stories have haunted us and followed us from our - 
lining,’ Samuel said. ‘We can carry them along with ps ^e 
visible tails -the story of original sin and the story of 
id Abel. And I don’t understand either of them. I dp’' " 
ind them at aU, but I feel them, Liza gets angry- wi 
ys I should not try- to understand them. She says w 
e try to explain a verity. Maybe she’s right may e s jr-^ 

Je, Liza says you’re a Presb5Uerian — do you unL..-j. 

ardeii of Eden and Cain and Abd? . - 

‘She thought I should be something, ao 
¦ 253 ; '¦ 


School Jong ago in 'San Francisco. Peapls like you to be some^ ' 
thing, preferably %%'hat they are.’ , , 

• Adam said, 'He asltod you 'if you understood.’ 

‘I think I understand, the .Fall. I could perhaps feel, that in 
myself. But the brother, murder -no. Well, maybe I don’t re- 
member the details very well.’ 

Samuel said, . 'Most people don’t read the details.- It’s . the 
details that astonish me. And Abel had no children.’ He looked 
up at the sky. 'Lord, how the day passes! It’s like a life -so. 
quickly when we don’t watch it and so slowly when we do. No,’ 
he said, Tm having enjojunent. And I made a promise to mysdf 
that I would not consider enjoyment a.^sin. I take a pleasure in ' 
inquiring into things. I’ve never been content to pass a stone 
-without looking under it. And it is a black disappointment to 
me that I can never see the far side of the moon.’ 

‘I don’t have a Bible,’ Adam said. ‘I left the family one -in 
Connecticut.’ ' 

‘I have,’ said Lee. 'I’ll get it.’ . . . - 

‘No need,’ ^id Samuel. 'Liza let me take, her mother’s. It’s ; 
here in my pocket.’ He took out tlie package tmd unwrapped the; 
battered book. ‘This one has been scraped and gnawed at,’ he 
said. ‘I wonder what agonies have settled here. Give me a used’ 
Bible and I will, I tliink,,be able to tell you about a man by the 
places that are edged with the dirt of seeking fingers. Liza wears 
a Bible down evenly. Here we are - this oldest story. If it troubles 
us it must be that we find the trouble in ourselves.’ 

'I haven’t heard it since I was a child,’ said Adam. 

..,‘You think it’s long then, and it’s %'ery short,’ said Samuel. 

through and then we’ll go back. Give me a little . 
throat’s dried out with wine. Here it is — such a litde , 
.. .r have^made so deep a wound.’ He looked down at.the- 

>> ! Sec ! he said. ‘The boys have gone to their sleep, there 

h the dust.’ 

Lee got up. Til cover them,’ he said. 

The dust is warm, said Samuel. ‘Now it goes,.tIiis way. “And 
\dam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, 
ind said, ‘I have gotten a man from the Lord.’ 

Adam started to speak and Samuel looked up at him and -he 
vas silent and covered his eyes with his hand. Samuel- read, , 

And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper ¦ 
)f sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground. And in the process- 
if time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of -the . 
pround an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he also brought of 

254 . 



the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the Lord 
had respect unto Abel and to his offering. But unto Cain and to 
his offering he had not respect.” ’ 

Lee said, ‘Now where- no, go on, go on. We’ll come back.’ 
Samuel read, ‘ “And Cain was very wroth, and his coimten- 
ance fell. And the Lord said tmto Cain, “Why art thou wroth? 
And why is thy countenance fallen? If thou doest well, shall 
thou not be accepted? And if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the 
door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over 
him'. 

‘ “And Gain talked with Abel his brother ; and it came to 
pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel 
his brother and slew him. And the Lord said tmto Cain, ‘Where 
is Abel thy brother?’ And he said, ‘I know not. Am I. my 
brother’s keeper?’ And he said, ‘What hast thou done? The voice 
of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me from the ground. And 
now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her 
moutlTfo receive thy brother’s blood from thy hand. When thou 
tillest the ground it shall not henceforth yidd unto thee her 
strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.’ 
And Cain said xmto the Lord, ‘My punishment is greater than I 
can bear. Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face 
of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid. And I shall be a 
fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pap 
that everyone that findeth me shall slay me.' And the Lord said 
' unto him, ‘Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be 
taken on him sevenfold.’ And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, 
lest any finding him should kill him. And Cain went out from 
the presence of the Lord and dwelt in the land of Nod on the 
east of Eden.” ’ 

Samuel closed the loose cover of the book almost with weari- 
ness. ‘There it is,’ he said. ‘Sixteen verses, no more. And oh, 
Lord! I had forgotten how dreadful it is — no single tone of 
encouragement. Maybe "Liza’s right. There’s nothing to under- 
stand.’ 

Adam sighed deeply. ‘It’s not a comforting story, is it?’ 

Lee poured a tumbler full of dark liquor from his roimd stone 
bottle and sipped it and opened his mouth to get the double taste 
on the back of his tongue. ‘No story has power, nor wiU it last, 
unless we feel in omrselves that it is true and true of us. What a 
• great burden of guilt men have!’ 

Samuel said to Adam, ‘And you have tried to take it 
aU.’ - 


255 



, 'lee said, "‘So do I, so does everyone. We gather our arms full 
..of guilt as though it were precious stuff. It must be that we 
wanrit that way.*' ¦ ' , . - ‘ 

Adam broke in, ‘It makes me feel better, not worse,’ 

‘How'do you mean?’ Samuel asked. ' , ¦ ' 

‘Well, every little boy thinks he invented sin. Virtue we think 
we learn, because we are told about it. But sin is our own design- 
ing.’ . ' 

• ‘Yes, I can see. But how does this story make it better?’ 

, . ‘Because,’ Adam said excitedly, ‘we are descended from this. 
This is our father. Some of our guilt is absorbed in our ances- 
try. What chance did we have? We are the children of our 
father. It means we aren’t the first. It’s an excuse, and there 
aren’t enough excuses in the world.’ 

'Not convincing ones anyway,’ said Lee. 'Else we would long 
ago have wiped out guilt, and die world would not be filled with 
sad, punished people.’ 

Samuel said, ‘But do you think of another frame for this pic- 
ture? Excuse or hot, we are snapped back to our ancestry. We 
have guilt.’ 

Adam said, ‘I remember being a little outraged at God. Both 
Cain and Abel gave what they had, and God accepted Abel and . 
rejected Cain. I never thought that was a just thing. I never 
understood it. Do you?’ 

‘Maybe we think out of a different background,’ said Lee. ‘I 
remember that this story was written by and for a shepherd' 
people. They were not farmers. Wouldn’t the god of shepherds 
find a fat lamb more valuable than a sheaf of barley? A sacri- 
must be the best and most valuable.’ 

‘Yes, I can see that,’ said Samuel. ‘And Lee, let me caution 
you about bringing your Oriental reasoning to Liza’s attention.’ 

Adam was excited. ‘Yes, but why did God condemn Cain?, 
Thads an injustice.’ 

Samuel said, ‘There’s an advantage to listening to the words. 
God did not condemn Cain at all. Even God can have a pre- 
ference, can’t He? Let’s suppose God liked lamb better than 
vegetables. I think I do myself. Cain brought Him a bunch of 
rarrots maybe. And God said, “I don’t like this. Try ’again; 
Bring me something I like and I’ll set you up alongside your 
brother.” But Cain got mad. His feelings were hurt. And when 
1 man’s feelings are hurt he wants to strike at something, and 
Abe] was in the way of his anger.’ 

Lee said, ‘St Paul says to the Hebrews that Abel had faith.’ 

256 



‘There’s no reference to it in Genesis/ Samuel said. ‘No faith 
or lack of faith. Only a hint of Cain’s temper.’ 

Lee asked, ‘How does Mrs Hamilton feel about the paradoxes 
of the Bible?’ 

“Why, she does not feel anj'thing because she does not admit 
they are there.’ 

‘But—’ 

‘Husbj man. Ask her. And j'Ou’U come out of it older but not 
less confused.’ 

. Adam said, ‘You tw'o have studied this. I only got it through 
my skin and not much of it stuck. Then Cain was driven out for 
murder?’ 

‘That’s right - for murder.’ 

‘And God branded him?’ 

‘Did you listen? Cain bore the mark not to destroj' him but to 
save him. And there’s a curse called down on any man who shall 
kill him. It was a preserving mark.’ 

Adam said, ‘I can’t get oVer a feeling that Cain got the dirt5' 
end of the stick.’ 

‘Maybe he did,’ said Samuel. ‘But Cain lived and had child- 
ren, and Abel lives only in the story. We are Cain’s children. 
And isn’t it strange that three grown men, here in a centur}' so 
many thousands of years away, discuss this crime as though it 
happened in King City yesterday and hadn’t come up for trial?’ 

One of the twins avVakened and yawned and looked at Lee and 
went to sleep again. 

Lee said, ‘Remember, Mr Hamilton, I told you I was tr3'ing 
to translate some old Chinese poetry into English? No, don’t 
worry. I wpn’t read it. Doing it, I found some of the old things 
as fresh and clear as this morning. And I wondered why. And, 
f course, people are interested only in themselves. If a story is 
lot about the hearer he will not listen. And I here make a rule - 
‘ great and lasting story is about everyone or it will not last. The 
trange and foreign is nor interesting - only the deeply personal 
ind familiar.’ 

Samuel said, ‘Apply that to the Cain-Abcl story.’ 

And Adam said, -‘I didn’t kill my brother — ’ Suddenly he 
¦topped and his mind went reeling back in time. 

‘I think I can,’ Lee answered Samuel. ‘I think this is the Ixisl- 
tnown story in the world because it is everybody’s story. I thinic 
t IS the symbol story of the human soul. I’m feeling my way 
sow -don’t jump on me if I’m not clear. The greatest terror a 
:hild can have is that he is not loved, and rejection is the hell lie 

257 



fears, I think everyone in the world to a large or small extrat has 
' felt rejection. And with rejection comes anger, and with anger 
some kind of crime- in revenge for the rejection, and with the 
enme guilt-and there-is the story of mankind, I think that if 
rejection could be amputated, the human would not be what he 
is. Maybe tltere would be few'er crazy people. I am sure in my- 
self there would not be many jails. It is aU there -the startj the 
beginning. One child, refused the love he craves, kicks the cat 
and hides his secret guilt; and another steals so that money will 
make him loved; and a third conquers the world -and always 
the guilt and revenge and more guilf. The human is the only 
guilty animal. Now wait! Therefore I think this old and terrible 
- story is important because it is a chart of the soul -the secret, 

¦ rejected, guilty soul. Mr Trask, you said you did not kill your 
brother and then you remembered something. I don’t want to 
know what it was, but was it very far apart from Cain and 
Abel? And what do you think of my Oriental patter, Mr Hamil- 

¦ ton? You know I am no more Oriental than you are.’ 

• Samuel had leaned his elbows on the table and his hands 
covered his eyes and his forehead. ‘I want to think,’ he said. 
‘Damn you, I want to think. I’ll want to take this off alone 
where I can pick it apart and see. Maybe you’ve tiunbled a world 
for me. And I don’t know what l ean build in ray world’s place.* 
Lee said softly, 'Couldn’t a world be built around accepted 
truth? Couldn’t some pains and insanities be rooted out if the 
,, causes were known?’ 

‘I don’t know, damn you. You’ve disturbed my pretty uni- 
, verse. You’ve taken a contentious game and made an answer of 
?, it. Let me alone -let me think! Your damned bitch is having 
pups in my brain already. Oh, I wonder what my Tom will 

¦ think of this ! He’ll cradle it in the palm of his hand. He’ll turn 
it slow in his brain like a roast of pork before the fire. Adam, 
come out now. You’ve been long enough in whatever memory' it 
. was.’ 

Adam started. He sighed deeply'. ‘Isn’t it too simple?’ he 
. asked. ‘I’m always afraid of simple things.’ 

- , ¦ ‘It isn’t simple at all,’ said Lee. ‘It’s 'desperately complicated. 
But at tlie end there’s light.’ 

, ‘There’s not going to be light long,’ Samuel said. ‘We’ve sat 
; and let the evening come. I drove over to help name the uvins 
and they’re not named. We’ve sufung ourselves on a pole. Lee, 
you' better keep your complications out of the machinery' of the 
. set-up churches or there might be a Chinese with nails in his 

' . 258 ¦ ' ¦ 


hands and feet. They like complications, but they like their ov.m 
I’ll have to be driving home.’ , , ‘ 

Adam said desperately, 'Name me some names.’ 

‘From the Bible?’ 

‘From anyplace.’ 

‘Well, led s see. Of all the people who started out of Egypt only 
two came to the Promised Land. Would you like them for a 
symbol?’ 

, ‘Who?’ 


‘Caleb and Joshua.’ 

‘Joshua was a soldier -a general. I don’t like soldiering.’ 
‘^^ell, Caleb was a captain.’ 

‘But not a general. I kind of like Caleb - Caleb Trask.’ 

One of the twins woke up and without interval began to v'ail. 
- ‘You called his name,’ said Samuel. ‘You don’t like Joshua; 
and Caleb’s named. He’s the smart one -the dark one. See, the 
other one is awake too. Well, Aaron I’ve always liked, but he 
didn’t make it to the Promised Land.’ 

The second boy almost joyfuUy began to cry. 

'That’s good enough,’ said Adam. 

Suddenly Samuel laughed. ‘In two minutes,’ he said, ‘and 
after a waterfall of words. Caleb and Aaron - now you are people 
and 5'ou have joined the fraternity and you have the right to be 
damned.’ 

Lee took the boys up under his arms. ‘Have you got them 
straight?’ he asked. 

‘Of comrse,’ said Adam. ‘That one is Caleb and you are 
Aaron.’ 

Lee lugged the yelling twins towards the house in the dusk. 
Yesterday I couldn’t tell them apart,’ said Adam. ‘Aaron and 
Cal*.’ 


Thank the good Lord we had produce from our patient 
• .thought,’ Samuel said. ‘Liza would have preferred Joshua. She 
loves the crashing walls of Jericho. But she likes Aaron too, so I 
guess it’s all right. I’ll go and hitch my rig.’ 

Adam walked to the shed with him. ‘I’m glad you came, he 
said. ‘There’s a weight off me.’ 

Samuel slipped the bit in Doxology’s reluctant mouth, set the 
. brow-band, arid buckled the throat-latch. ‘Mayte you U now be 
thinking of 'the garden in the flat land,’ he said. can see i 
there the way you planned it.’ ¦ 

Adam was Tong in answering. At last he smcL I 
of energy is gone out of me. I can t fee e pt 


259 


have money enough to live. I never wanted it for myseK. I have 
no one to show a garden to.’ 

Samuel-, wheeled on him and his eyes were filled with tears.- 
, ‘Don’t think it will ever die/ he cried. ‘Don’t expect it. Are you 
¦ better than other men? I tell you it won’t ever die until you do.’ 
He stood panting for a moment and then he climbed into the . 
rig andTvhipped Doxology and he drove away, his shoulders 
hunched, without saying goodbye. 



Part Three 


CHAPTER 23 

I 

The Hamiltons were strange, high-strung people and 
some of them were tuned too high and they snapped. This hap- 
pens often in the world. 

Of all his daughters Una was Samud’s greatest joy. Even as a 
little girl she hungered for learning as a child does for cookies in 
the late afternoon. Una and her father had 'a conspiracy about 
learning -secret books were borrowed and read and their secrets 
communicated privately. 

' Of all the children Una had the least humour. She met and 
married an intense dark man— a man v/hose fingers were stainai 
with chemicals, mostly silver nitrate. He ^vas one of those men 
who live in poverty so that their lines of questioning may con- 
tinue. His question tvas about photography. He beliet-ed that the 
exterior world could be transferred to paper— not in the ghost 
shadings of black and white but in the colours the human eye 
perceives. 

His name was Anderson and he had little gift for co mm u m ca- 
. tion. Like most technicians, he had a terror and a contempt for 
speculation. The inductive leap was not for him. He dug a step 
and pulled himself up one single step, the way a man climbs the 
last shoulder of a mountain. He had great contempt, born of 
fear, for the Hamiltons, for they all half believed they had vungs 
- and they got some bad falls that way. 

Anderson never fell, never slipped back, never flew. His steps 
moved slowly, slowly upwards, and in the end, it is said, he 
found what he wanted — colour film. He mamed Una, perhaps, 
because she had little humour, and this reassured him. .And 
because her family frightened and embarrassed him, he took her 
away to the north, and it was black and lost where he went - 
somewhere on the borders of Oregon. He must have lived a very 
primitive life with his bottles and papers. 

Una wrote bleak letters without joy but also without self-pity. 
She was well and she- hoped the faniily w'as well. Her husband 
Was near to his discovery. 

And then she died and her body was shipped home. 

'261 



•-••I never .knew Una. She. was dead before I rememter,- but 
George Hamilton told me about it many years later and hfe eyes 
filled with tears and his voice croaked -.in the telling. , ¦ 

‘Una was not a beautiful girl like Mollie,’ he said. ‘But she had 
- the loveliest hands and feet. Her ankles were as slender as grass, 

¦ and she moved like grass. Her fingers were long and the nails 
narrow and shaped like almonds. And Una had lovely skin too, 
translucent, even glowing. 

¦ ‘She didn’t laugh and play like the rest of us. There was some- 

¦ thing set apart about her. She seemed always to be listening. 
When she was reading, 'her face would be like the face of one 

, listening to music. And when we asked her any question, why, 
she gave the answer, if she knew' it - not pointed up and full of , 
colour and “maybes” and “it-might-bes” the way the rest of us 
would. We were always full of bull. There w’as some pure simple 
thing in Una,’ George said. 

‘And then they brought her home. Her nails were broken to 
the quick and her fingers cracked and all worn out. And her 
poor, dear feet — ’ George could not go on for a while, and then 
he said with the fierceness of a man trying to control himself, 
‘Her feet were broken and gravel-cut and briar-cut. Her dear 
feet had not worn shoes for a long time. And her skin was. rough 
as rawhide. ' 

‘We think it was an accident,’ he said. ‘So many chemicals 
around. We think it was.’ 

But Samuel thought and mourned in the thought, that the 
accident was pain and despair. • 

Una’s death struck Samuel like a silent earthquake. He said no 
. brave and reassuring words, he simply sat alone and rocked himr , 
self. He felt that it was his neglect tliat had done it. . ' 

And now his tissue, which had fought joyously against time, 
gave up a little. His young skin turned old, his clear ey^ dulled, 
and a little stoop came to his great shoulders. Liza with her ac- 
ceptance could take care of tragedy; she had no real hope this 
. side of Heaven. But Samuel had put up a laughing wall against 
natural laws, and Una’s death breached his battlements. He be- 
, came an old man. . . 

His other children were doing well. George was in the insuf-. 
ance business. Will was getting rich. Joe had gone, east and was 
helping to invent a new profession called adt'ertising. Joe’s very 
faults were virtues in this, field. He found that he could com- 
• municate his material day-dreaming -and, properly applied, 
that is all advertising is. Joe was a big man in a new field. , 

262 - 



The girls were married, all accept Dessie, and she had a suc- 
cessful dressmaking business in Salinas. Only Tom had never 
got started. 

Samuel told Adam Trask that Tom was arguing with great- 
ness. And the father watched his son and could feel the drive 
and the fear, the advance and the retreat, because he could feel 
it in himself. 

Tom did not have his father’s lyric sofmess or his gay good 
looks. But you could feel Tom when you came near him -you 
could feel strength and warmth and an iron integrit3\ And 
tmder all of this was a shrinking -a shy shrinking. He could be 
as gay as his father, and suddenly in the middle of it would be 
cut the way you would cut a violin string, and you could watch. 
Tom go whirling into darkness. 

He was a dark-faced man; his skin, perhaps from sun, was a 
black red, as though some Norse or perhaps Vandal blood was 
perpetuated in him. His hair and beard and moustache ‘were 
dark red too, and his eyes gleamed startlingly blue against his 
colouring. He was powerful, hearty of shoulders and arm, but 
his hips were slim. He could lift and run and hike and ride with 
anyone, but he had no sense of competition whatever. Will and 
George were gamblers and often tried to entice their brother into 
the joys and sorrows of venture. 

Tom said, Tve tried and it just seems tiresome. I’ve thought 
why this must be. I get no great triumph when I win and no 
tragedy when I lose. Without these it is meaningless. It is not a 
way to make money, that we know, and unless it can simulate 
birth and death, joy and sorrow, it seems, at least to me - it feels - 
it doesn’t feel at ah, I would do it if I felt anything - good or bad.’ 

Will did not understand this. His whole life was competitive 
and he lived by one kind of gambling or another. He loved Tom 
and he tried to give him the things he himself found pleasant. 
He took him into business and tried to inoculate him with the 
. joys of buying arid selling, of outwitting other men, of judging 
them for a bluff, of living by manoeuvre. 

Always Tom came back to the ranch, puzzled, not critical, but 
feeling that somewhere he had lost track. He felt that he should 
take joy in the man-pleasures of contest, but he could not pre- 
tend to himself that he did. 

Samuel had said that Tom always took too much on his plate, 
whether it was beans or women. And Samuel was wise, but I 
tjiink he knew only one side of Tom. Maybe Tom opened up a 
little more for children. What I set down about liim will be the 

263 


i^ult of mOTory plus what I know to be true plus conjecture ; 
built on the combination. Who know's whether it will be correct? . 

We lived in Salinas and we knew when Tom had arrived -I 
think he alw'ays arrived at night -because under our pillow-s, 
Mary's and mine, there would be packages of gum. And gum 
was valuable in those days just as a nickel was valuable. There 
were months w'hen he did not come, bur e\'ery morning as soon 
as we aw'akened we put our hands under our pillows to see.- And 
I still do it, and it has been many years since there had been gum 
there. " 

My sister Mary did not want to be a girl. It was a misfor- 
tune she could not get- used to. She was an athlete, a marble 
plaj’cr, a pitcher of one-o’-cat, and the trappings of a girl in- 
hibited her. Of course this was long before the compensations 
for being a girl were apparent to her. 

Just as we knew that somew'here on our bodies, probably 
- under the arm, there was a button which if pressed just right 
W'ould permit us to fly, so Mary had w'orked out a magic for 
herself to change her over into the tough httle boy she w'anted 
to be. If she w'ent to sleep in a magical position, Imees crooked 
just right, head at a magical angle, fingers all crossed one over 
the other, in the morning she w'ould be a boy. Et'cry night she; 
tried to find exactly the right combination, but she never could. 

I used to help her cross her fingers like shiplap. 

She was despairing of ever getting it right w'hen one morning 
there w'as gum under the pillow. We each peeled a 'stick and 
solemnly chewed it; it was Beeman’s peppermint, and nothing 
so delicious has been made since. 

¦‘i Mary was pulling on her long black ribbed stockings when 
. she said with great relief, ‘Of course.’ 

‘Of course what?’ I asked. 

‘Uncle Tom,’ she said and chewed her gum with great snap- , 
ping sounds. 

‘Uncle Tom what?’ I demanded. 

‘He’ll know how to get to be a boy.’ 

There it was - just as simple as that. I wondered why I hadn’t 
¦thought of it myself. 

Mother was in the kitchen overseeing a new little Danish girl 
who worked for us. We had a series of girls. New-come Danish 
. farm families put their daughters out to service w'ith American 
families, and they learned not only English but American cook- 
ing and. table setting and manners and all the little niceties of 
-high life in Salinas. At the end of a couple of years of this, at 

' 264 


twelve dollars a month, the girls were highly desirable'Xvives fori- 
American boys. Not only did they have American manners but 
they could still work like horses-in the fields. Some of the most 
elegant families in Salinas today are descended from these girls. 

It would be flaxen-haired Mathilde in the kitchen, with 
Mother clucking over her like a hen. 

We charged in. ‘Is he up?’ 

‘Sh!’ said Mother. ‘He got in late. You let him sleep.’ 

But the water was running in the basin of the back bedroom, 
so.we knew he was up. We crouched like cats at his door, wait- 
ing for him to emerge. 

There was always a little diffidence between us at first. I think 
Uncle Tom was as shy as we were. I think he wanted to come 
running out and toss us in the air, but instead we were all 
formal. 

‘Thank you for the gum. Uncle Tom.’ 

‘I’m glad you liked it.’ 

‘Do you think we’ll have an oyster loaf late at night while 
you’re here?’ 

' ‘We’ll certainly try, if your mother will let you.’ 

"We drifted into the sitting-room and sat down. Mother’s voice 
called from the kitchen, ‘Children, you let him alone.’ 

‘They’re all right, Ollie,’ he called back. 

We sat in a triangle in the living-room.''Tom’s face w'as so 
dark and his eyes so blue. He wore good clothes but he never 
f seemed well dressed. In this he was very different from his 
father. His red moustache was never neat and his hair would not 
lie down and his hands were hard from work. 

Mary said, ‘Uncle Tom, how do you get to be a boy?’ 

‘How? Why, Mary, you’re just born a boy.’ 

‘No, that’s not what I mean. How do 1 get to be a boy?’ 

Tom studied her gravely. ‘You?’ he asked. 

Her words poured out. ‘I don’t want to be a girl. Uncle Tom. 

I want to be a boy. A girl’s all kissing and dolls. I don’t want to 
be a girl. I don’t want to bcj’ Tears of anger welled up in Marv's 
eyes. 

Tom looked down at his hands and picked at a loose piece r: 
callous with a broken nail. He wanted to say something bes-_t> 
ful, I think. He wished for words like his father’s words, r-- sr 
. winged words, cooing and lovely. ‘I wouldn’t like ro_ c.- . 
boy,’ he said. 

‘Why not?’ 

‘I lik&you as a girl.’ 


265 


- An- idol was crasliing in Mary's temple. ‘You mean you like . 
girls?’ • • . ... • ¦ . 

‘Yes, Marj^, I iike girls very much.’ , 

¦_ A look of distaste crossed Mary’s face. If it were true, Tom 
- tvas a fool; She put on her don’t-give-me-any-of-that-crap -tone. 
‘All right,’ she ^id, ‘but how do / go about being a boy?’ . 

Tont had a good ear. He knew he was reeling down in Mary’s 
estimation and he wanted her to love him and to admire him. At 
the same time there was a fine steel wire of truthfulness in' him 
that cut oS the heads of fast-travelling lies. He looked at Mary’s ¦ 
hair, so light that it was almost white, and braided tight.to be 
¦ out of the way, and dirty at tlie end of the braid, for Mary 
vviped her hands on her braid before she made a difficult marble 
shot. Tom studied her cold and hostile eyes. 

‘I don’t think you really want to change.’ 

‘Ido.’ 

Tom was wrong — she really did. 

‘Well,’ he said, ‘you can’t. And some day you’ll be glad.’ , 

‘I won’t be glad,’ said Mary, and she turned to me and said 
with frigid contempt, ‘He doesn't know ! ’ 

Tom winced and I shivered at the immensity of her criminal 
charge. Mary was braver and more ruthless than most. That’s 
why she won every marble in Salinas. 

'Tom said uneasily, ‘If your mother says it’s all right, I’U order 
the oyster loaf this morning and pick it up tonight.’ 

‘I don’t like oyster loaves,’ said Alary and stalked to our bed- 
room and slammed the door. , > 

Tom looked ruefully after her. ‘She’s a girl all right,’ he said. 

Now we were alone together and I felt that I liad to heal the 
, wound Mary had made. ‘I love oyster loaves,’ I said. 

‘Sure you do. So does Mary.’ 

‘Uncle Tom, don’t you think there’s some way for her to be a 
boy?’ 

‘No, I don’t,’ he said sadly. ‘I would have told^ her if I had 
Imovvn.’ 

‘She’s the best pitcher in the West End.’ 

Tom sighed and looked down at his hands again, and I could , 
, see his failure on him and I was sorry for him, aching sorry. I 
brought out my hollowed cork with pins stuck down to make 
bars. ‘Would you like to have my fly cage. Uncle Tom?’ 

Oh, he was a great gentleman. ‘Do you want me to have it?’ 

^ ‘Yes. You see, you pull up a pin to get the fly in and then he 
sits in there and buzzes.’ 


266 



I 

‘I’d like to have it very much. Thank you, John.’ 

He worked all day with a sharp tiny pocket-knife on a small 
block of wood, and when we came home from school he had 
carved a little face. The eyes and ears and lips were movable, 
and little perches connected them with the inside of the hollow 
head. At the bottom of the neck there was a hole closed by a 
cork. And this was very wonderful. You caught a fly and eased 
him through the hole and set the cork- And sudderdy the head 
baame alive. The eyes moved and the lips talked and the ears 
wiggled as the frantic fly crawled over the little' perches. Even 
Mary forgave him a little, but she never really trusted him until 
after she was glad she was a girl, and then it was too late. He 
gave the head not to me but to us. We still have it put away - 
somewhere, and it still works. 

Sometimes Tom took me fishing. We started before the stm 
came up and drove in the rig straight towards Fremont Peak, 
and as we neared the mountains the stars would pale out and the 
light would rise to blacken the mountains. I can remember rid- 
ing and pressing my ear and cheek against Tom’s coat- And I 
can remember that his arm would rest lighdy over my shoulders 
and his hand pat my arm occasionally. Finally we would pull up ¦ 
trader an oak tree and take the horse out of the shafts, water him 
at the stream side, and halter him to the back of the rig. 

I don’t remember that Tom talked. Now that I think of it, I 
can’t remember the sound of his voice or the kind of words he 
used. I can remember both about my grandfather, but when I 
think of Tom it is a memory of a kind of warm silence. Maybe 
, he didn’t talk at all. Tom had beautiful tackle and made his own 
flies. But he didn’t seem to care whether we caught trout or not. 
He needed not to triumph over animals. 

I remember the five-fingered ferns growing under little water- 
falls, bobbing their green fingers as the droplets struck them. 
And I remember the smells of the hills, wild azalea and a very 
distant skunk and the sweet cloy of lupin and horse sweat on 
harness. I remember the sweeping lovely dance of high buzzards 
against the sky and Tom looking long up at them, but Lcan’t re- 
member that he ever said anything about them. I remember 
; holding the bite of a line while Tom drove pegs and braided a 
splice. I remember the smell of crushed ferns in the creel and 
the delicate sweet odour of fresh damp rainbow trout lying so 
prettily on the green bed. And finally I can remember coming 
' back to the rig and pouring rolled barley into the leather feed- 
bag and buckling it over the horse’s head behind the ears. And 

. 267 


,I have no sound of his voice or . words in my ear; he is dark and 
silent and hugely warm in my memory. , 

' Tom felt his darimess. His father was beautiful and clever, his 
mother .was short and mathematically sure. Each of his brothers 
and, sisters had looks dr gifts or fortune. Tom loved'all of them 
passionately, but he felt heavy and earth-bound. He climbed 
ecstatic mountains and floundered in the rocky darkness between 
the peaks. He had spurts of bravery but they were brackSed in 
the battens of cowardice. 

Samuel said that Tom was quavering over greatness, trying to 
decide whether he could take the cold responsibility. Samuel 
knew, his son’s quality and felt the potential of violence, and it 
frightened him, for Samiiel had no violence -even when he hit 
Adam Trask with his fist he had no violence. And the books 
that came into the house, some of them secretly -well, Samuel 
rode lightly on top of a book and be balanced happily among 
ideas the way a man rides white rapids in a canoe. But Tom got 
into a book, crawled and grovelled between the covers, tuimelled 
like a mole among the thoughts, and came up with the. book all 
- over his face and hands. 

Violence and shyness -Tom’s loins needed women and at the 
same time he did not think himself worthy of a woman. For 
long periods he would welter in a howling ceh'bacy, and then he 
would take a train to San Francisco and roll and wallow in 
women, and then he would come silently back to the ranch, feel- . 
ing weak and unfulfilled and unworthy and he would punish 
himself with work, would plough and plant unprofitable land, 
would cut tough oakwood until his back was breaking and his 
arms were weary rags. 

It is probable that his father stood between Tom and the sim, , . 
and Samuel's shadow fell on him. Tom wrote secret poetry, and 
in those days it was only sensible to keep it secret. The poets 
were pale emasculates, and Western men held them in contempt. 
Poetry was a symptom of weakness, of degeneracy and decay. To 
read it was to court catcalls. To write it was to be suspected and 
ostracized. Poetry was a secret rdce, and properly so. No one . 
Imows whether Tom’s poetry was any good or not, for he showed 
it to only one person, and before he died he burned every word. 
From the ashes in the stove there must have been a great deal 
of it. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ , 

Of all his family Tom loved Dessie best. She was gay. Laugh- 
ter lived on her doorstep. 

Her shop was a unique institution in Salinas. It was a 

268 _ 


woman’s world. Here all the rules, and the fears that created':the 
iron rules, went down. The door was closed to men. It was a 
sanctuary where women could be themselves - smelly, wanton^ 
mystic, conceited, truthful, and interested. The whalebone cor- 
sets came off at Dessie’s, the sacred corsets that moulded and 
warped woman-flesh into goddess-flesh. At Dessie’s they were 
women who went to the toilet and over-ate and scratched 
and farted. And from this freedom came laughter, roars of 
laughter. 

Men could hear the laughter through tlie closed door and 
were properly frightened at what was going on, feeling, perhaps, 
that they were the butt of the laughter -which to a large extent 
v/as true. 

I can, see Dessie now, her gold pince-nez wobbling on a nose 
not properly bridged for pince-nez, her eyes streaming with 
hilarious tears, and her whole front constricted with muscular 
spasms of laughter. Her hair would come down and drift be- 
tween her glasses and her eyes, and the glasses would fall off her 
wet nose and spin and swing at the end of their black ribbon. 

You had to order a dress from Dessie months in advance, and 
. you made twenty visits to her shop before you chose material 
and pattern. Nothing so healthy as Dessie had ever happened to 
Salinas. The men had their lodges, their clubs, their whore- 
houses; the women nothing but the Altar Guild and the mincing 
coquetry of the minister, until Dessie came along. 

And then Dessie fell in love. I do not know any details of her 
love affair— who the man was or what the circumstances, whe- 
.ther it was reh'gion or a living wife, a disease or a selfishness. I 
guess my mother knew, but it was one of those things put away 
in the family closet and never brought out. And if other people 
, in Salinas knew, they must have kept it a loyal town secret. AU 
I do know is that it was a hopeless thing, grey and terrible. After 
a year of it the joy was all drained out of Dessie and the laughter 


had ceased. , , - t. -uj 

Tom raged crazily through the hiUs like a lion in horn e 

pain. In the middle of a night he saddled and ^ 

. waiting for the morning train, to Salinas. Samuel followe m 
and sent a telegram from King City to Salmas. 

And when in the morning Tom, his face ^^m'rinp-for 

spent horse up John Street in Salinas, the " 
him. fie disarmed Tom and put him m a _ceU and fed him 
¦coffee and brandy until Sanmd came lii^ 

Samuel did not lecture Tom. He took rum. 


269 



‘Don’t do it. Let him alone. Wc know him from the insides of 
ourselves.' . •' 

- In a little while Tom came back. ‘I want to apologize/ he said. 
‘I’m very sorry. Maybe I’m a little dnink. Father calls it “jolly” 
when I do it. One night I rode home’ - it was a confession — ‘and ' 
, I came staggering across the yard and I fell into the rosebush 
and crawled up the stairs on my hands and knees and I was sick 
on the floor beside my'bed. In the morning I tried to tell him I- 
was sorryv and do you know what he said? “Why, Tom; you 
were just jolly.” “Jolly”, if 1 did it. A drunken man didn’t crawl 
home.'Just jolly.’ ' . 

George stopped the crazy flow of talk. ‘We want to apologize 
. . f o you, Tom,’ he said. ‘Why, we sounded as though we were 
blaming you and we didn’t mean to. Or maybe we did mean to. 
And we’re sorry.’ 

Will Martin said realistically, ‘It’s too hard a life here. Why 
don’t we get'lum to sdl out and move to town? He could have 
a long and happy life. Mollie and I would like them to come and 
live with us.’ 

‘I don’t tliink he’d do it,’ said Will. ‘He’s stubborn as a mule • 
and proud as a horse. He’s got a pride like brass.’ 

Olive’s husband, Ernest, said, ‘Well, there’d be no harm in 
. asking him. We would like to have him -or both of them-tvith 
us.’ 

Then they were silent again, for the idea of not Iiaving tlie 
ranch, the dry', stony dbert of heart-breaking hillside and un- 
profitable hollow, was shocking to them. 

¦\ Will Hamilton from instinct and training in business had be- 
¦’! come a fine reader of the less profound impulses of men and 
women. He said, ‘If we ask him to close up shop it will be like 
asking him to close his life, and he won’t do it.’ 

‘You’re right. Will/ George agreed. ‘He would think it was 
like quitting. He’d feel it ^vas a cowardice. No, he will nev'er sell 
out, and if he did I don’t think he would live a wedc.’ 

Will said, ‘There’s another way. Maybe he could come for a 
visit. Tom can run the ranch. It’s time Father and Mother saw 
something of the world. All kinds of things are happening. It 
would freshen him, and then he could come back and go to wprk _ 
again. And after a while maybe he wouldn’t have to. He say’S 
himself tltat thing about time doing the job that dynamite can’t 
touch.’ - 

Dessie brushed the Irnir out of her eyes. ‘I wonder if you really 
tliink he’s that stupid/ she said. , ¦ . 

272 


And Will said out of his experience, ‘Sometimes a man, wants 
to be stupid if it lets him do a thing his cleverness forbids. We 
can try it anyway. What do you all think?’ 

There was a nodding of heads in' the kitchen, and only Tom 
sat rocklike and brooding. 

‘Tom, wouldn’t you be willing to take over the ranch?’ George 
asked. , 

fOh, that’s nothing,’ said Tom. ‘It’s no trouble to run the 
ranch because the ranch doesn’t run -never has.’ 

‘Then why don’t you agree?’ 

‘I’d find a reluctance to insult my father,’ Tom said. ‘He’d 
know.’ 

‘But where’s the harm in suggesting it ? ’ 

, Tom rubbed his ears until he forced the blood out of them 
and for a moment they were white. ‘I don’t forbid you,’ he said; 
‘But I can’t do it.’ 

George said, ‘We could write it in a letter -a kind of invita- 
tion full of jokes. And when he got tired of one of us, he could 
¦ go to another. There’s years of visiting among the lot of us. 
And that was how they left it. 


Ill 


Tom brought Olive’s letter from King City, and because he 
•knew what it contained he waited until he caught Samuel alone 
before he gave it to him. Samuel was working in the forge and 
his hands were black. He took the envelope by a tiny corner and 
put it on the anvil, and then he scrubbed his hands m the half- 
' barrd of black water into which he plunged hot iron. He slit the 
letter open with the point of a horseshoe nail and wrat into t e 
sunlight to read It. Tom had the wheels off the buckboard and 
was buttering the axles with yellow axle gr^e. He watc s 


father from the corners of his eyes. _ . u i ;i-c- 

Samuel finished the letter and folded it and back in its , 

envelope. He sat down on the bench in front o e „• 
stared into space. Then he opened the letter an ^ Then 
and folded it again and put it in his blue s ^ 

Tom saw him stand up and walk slow y up. 
kicking at the flints on the ground. miserly grass had 

There had been a 

started up. Half way up the hill 1^. sprea/> 

up a handful of the harsh gravelly ^ shiiiin, ,, 

it with his forefinger, flint, and sandstone ana 


273 



inica'and a frail rootlet and a veined stone. He let it slip from 
his hand and brushed his palms. He picked up a spear of grass 
arid set ithenveen his teeth and stared up the hill to the sky. A 
nervous cloud was scurrying eastward, searching for’ trees 
on which to rain, , - 

Samud stood up and sauntered down the hill. He looked into 
the tool-shed and patted the four-by-four supports. He paused 
near Tom and spun one of the free-running wheels of the buck- 
board, and he inspected Tom as though he saw him for the first 
time. 'Why, you’re a grown-up manj’ he said. 

‘Didn’t you know?’ 

' ‘I guKs I did -I guess I did,’ said Samuel and sauntered on. 
There was the sardonic look on his face his family knew so wdl 
-the joke pn himself that made him laugh inw^ardly. He walked 
by the sad little garden and all round the house— not a new 
house any more. Even the last added lean-to bedrooms were old 
and weathered and the putty round the window-panes had 
shrunk away from the glass. At the porch he turned arid sur- 
veyed the whole home cup of the ranch before he tvent inside. 

Liza was rolling out pie-crust on the floury board. She was so 
expert with the rolling-pin that the dough seemed alive. It flat- 
tened out and then pulled back a little from tension in itself. 
Liza lifted the pale sheet of it and laid it over one of the pie tins 
and Pimmed the edges with a knife. The prepared berries lay 
deep in red juice in a bowl. 

Samuel sat down in a kitchen chair and crossed his legs and 
looked at her. His eyes were smiling. 

‘Can’t you find something to do this time of day?’ she asked. 

‘Oh, 1 guess I could, Another, if I wanted to.’ 

‘Well, don’t sit there and make me nervous. The papef’s__in 
the other room if you’re feeling day-lazy.’ 

‘I’ve read it,’ said Samuel. 

- ‘All of it?’ 

‘All I want to.’ 

‘Samuel, what’s the matter with you? You’re up to .'some- 
thing. I can see it in your face. Now tell it, and let me get on 
.with my pies.’ 

He swung his leg and smiled at her. ‘Such a little bit of a 
wife,’ he said. ‘Three of her is hardly a bite.’ 

‘Samuel, now you stop that. I don’t mind a joke in the£s’m- 
ing sometimes, but it’s not eleven o’clock. Now you go along.’ 

Samuel said, ‘Liza, do you know the meaning of the English 
word "vacation”?’ - , 


274 


‘Now don’t you make jokes in the morning.’ - 

“Do you, Liza?’ 

‘Of course I do. Don’t play me for a fooL’ 

‘What does it mean?’ 

‘Going away for a rest to the sea and the beach. Now, Samuel, 
it out with your fooling.’ 

‘I wonder how you know the word.’ 

‘Will you tell me what you’re after? Why shouldn’t I 
aow?’ 

“Did 5'ou ever have one, Liza?’ 

‘Why, I — ’ She stopped. 

‘In fifty years, did you ever have a vacation, you little, silly, 
alf-pint, smidgin of a wife?’ 

‘Samuel, please go out of my kitchen,’ she said apprehensively. 

He took the letter from his pockfet and unfolded it. ‘It’s from 
)llie’ he said. ‘She wants us to come and visit in Salinas. They’ve 
xed over the upstairs rooms. She wants us to get to loiow the 
hildren. She’s got us tickets for the Chautauqua season. Billy 
lunday’s going to vnestle with the Devil and Brj^an is going to 
nake Ws Cross of Gold speech. I’d like to hear that. Ifs an old 
ciol of a speech but they say he gives it in a way to break your 
leart.’ 

Liza rubbed her nose and floured it with her finger. ‘Is it very 
:ostly?’ she asked anxiously. 

‘Costly? OUie has bought the tickets. They’re a present.’ ¦ 

‘We can’t go,’ said Liza. ‘WTio’d run the ranch?’ 

‘Tom would — what running there is to do in the winter.’ 

‘He’d be lonely.’ _ . 

‘George would maybe come out and stay a while to go quail 
hunting. See what’s in the letter, Liza.’ 

“What are those?’ 

‘Two tickets to Salinas on the train. OUie says she doesn t 


¦¦ant to give us a single escape.’ 

‘You can just tuim them in and send her back the money. ^ 
‘No, I can’t. Why, Liza -Mother -now don’t. Here- here s a 
landkerchief.’ 

‘That’s a dish-towel,’ said Liza. ' , , ¦ 

‘Sit here. Mother. There ! I guess the shock o ta 'iqg a 
:ind of thretv you. Here! I know it’s a dish-rowel. The}' say 
BUly Sunday drives the Devil all over the stage. 

‘That’s blasphemy,’ said Liza. , Ttnld 

‘But I’d like to see it, wouldn’t you? Wtat ^ ^5, ’ . • ; 

your head. I didn’t hear you. What did you y- 
¦ - - 275 - - 


T said yes/ said Liza. ... . 

Tom was making a drawing when Samuel, came in to him. 
Tom looked at his father with veiled eyes, trying to read the 
effect of Olive’s letter. ¦ • 

Samuel looked at the drawing. What is it?’ , . 

, ‘I’m trying to work out a gate-opener so a man won’t have to 
get out of his rig. Here’s the pull-rod to open the latch.’ 

. ‘What’s going to open it?’ , 

‘I figured a strong spring.’ 

Samuel studied the drawing. ‘Then what’s going to close 

;it?' ' . ¦ _ 

¦ ‘This bar here. It would slip to this spring with the tension 
the other %yay.’ , . . , 

‘i see,’ said Samuel. ‘It might work too, if the gate was truly 
hung. And it would only take twice as much time to make and 
keep up as twenty years of getting out of the rig and.op^iig , 
the gate.’ - , 

Tom protested, ‘Sometimes with a skittish horse — ’ 

‘I know,’ said his father. ‘But the main reason is that it’s fun.’ 

Tom griimed. ‘Caught me,’ he said. 

‘Tom, do you think you could look after the. ranch ff your 
mother and I took a little trip?’ - . 

‘Why, sure,’ said Tom. ‘Where do you plan to go?’ 

‘Ollie wants us to stay with her for a while in Salinas.’ 

‘Why, that would be fine,’ said Tom. ‘Is Mother agreeable?’ 

‘She is, always forgetting the expense.’ 

‘That’s fine,’ said Tom. ‘How long do you plan to be gone?’ f 

Samuel’s jetvelled, sardonic eyes dwelt on "Tom’s face until 
Tom said, ‘What’s the matter. Father?’ . . . 

‘It’s the little tone, son -so little that I could barely hear it. 
But it was there. Tom, my son, if you have a secret with your 
brothers and sisters, I don’t mind. I think that’s good.’ - 

‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Tom. 

‘You may tliank God you didn’t want to be an actor, Tom, 
because you would have been a very bad one. You %vorkcd it out 
at Thanksgiving, I guess, when you were all together. And it’s 
working smooth as butter. I see Will’s hand in this. Don’t tell 
me if you don’t want to.’ 

‘I. wasn’t in favour of it,’ said Tom. 

‘It doesn’t sound like you,’ his father said. ‘You’d be for scat- . 
tering the truth out in the sun for me to. see. Don’t tell the 
others I know.’ He turned away and then came back and put his 
hand on Tom’s shoulders. ‘Thank you for wanting to honour. 

¦ ' 276 . 



me with the truth, my son. It’s not clever but it’s more per- 
manent.’ 

‘I’m glad you’re going.’ 

Samuel stood in the doorway of the forge and looked at the ~ 
land. ‘They say a mother loves best an ugly child,’ he said, and 
he shook his head sharply. ‘Tom, I’ll trade your honour for 
honour. You will please hold this in your dark secret place, nor 
tell any of your brothers and sisters -I know why I’m going - 
and, Tom, I know where I’m going, and I am content’ 


CHAPTER 24 

I 

I H A V E wondered why it is that some people are less affected 
and tom by the verities of life and death than others. Una’s 
death cut the earth from tmder Samuel’s feet and- opened his 
defended keep and let in old age. On the other hand Liza, who 
surely loved her family as deeply as did her husband, was not 
destroyed or warped. Her life continued evenly. She felt sorrov/ 
but she .survived it 

I think perhaps Liza accepted the world as she accepted the 
Bible, with all of its paradoxes and its reverses. She did not like 
death but she knew it existed, and when it came it did not sur- 
prise her. 

Samuel may have thought and played and philosophized about 
death, but he did not really believe in it. His world did not have 
death as a member. He, and all around him, was immortal. When 
real death came it was an outrage, a denial of the immortality he 
deeply felt, and the one crack in his wall caused the whole struc- 
ture to crash. I think he had always thought he could argue 
himself out of death. It was a personal opponent and one he 
cdiild lick. 

To Liza it was simply death -the thing promised and ex- 
pected. She could go on and in her sorrow put a pot of beans in 
the oven, bake six pies and plan to ocactness how much food 
would be necessary properly to feed the funeral guests. And she 
could in her sorrow see that Samuel had a clean white shirt and 
that his black broadcloth was bmshed and free of spots and his 
shoes blacked. Perhaps it takes these two kinds to make a good 
marriage, riveted "with several kinds of strengths. 

277 



Once Samuel accepted, he could probably go farther than 
Liza, but the process of accepting tore him to pieces: . Liza 
watched him closely after the decision to go to .Salinas. She 
didn’t quite know wliat he was up to, but, like a good and 
cautious mother, she knew he was up to something. She was a 
complete realist. Everything else being equal, she was glad to be 
going to visit her children^ She was curious about them and. 
their children. She had no love of places. A place was only aj 
resting stage on the way to Heaven. She did not like work for ¦ 
itself, but she did it because it was there to be done, /^d she was 
tired. Increasingly it was more difficult to fight the aches and' 
stiffness which tried to keep her in bed in the morning -not that 
they ever succeeded. ‘ ^ 

And she looked forward to Heaven as a place where clothes 
did not get dirty and where food did not have to be cooked and 
dishes washed. Privately there were some things in Heaven of . 
which she did not quite approve. There was too much singing, . 
and she didn’t see how even the Elect could survive for very - 
long the celestial laziness which was promised. 'She would find 
something to do in Heaven. There must be something to take , up • 
one’s time -some clouds to dam, some weary wings to rub with 
liniment. Maybe the collars of the robes needed turning now and ' 
then, and when you come right down to it, she couldn’t believe 
that even in Heaven there would not be cobwebs in some. corner 
to be knocked down with a cloth-covered broom. 

She was gay and frightened about the visit to Salinas. She 
liked the idea so well that she felt there must be something bor- 
dering on sin involved in it And the Chautauqua? Well, she 
didn’t have to go and probably wouldn’t Samuel would run 
tvild - she would have to watch him. She never lost her feeling 
that he was yoimg and helpless. It was a good thing that she 
did not know what went on in his mind, and, through his. 
mind, what happened to his body. 

¦ Places were very important to Samuel. The ranch was a rela- 
tive, and when he left it he plunged a knife into a, darling. But 
having made up his mind, Samuel set about doing it well. He • 
made formal calls on all of his neighbours, the old-timers who 
remembered how it used to be and how it was. And whoi 'he 
drove away from his old friends they knew they would not sw 
him again, although he did not say it. He took to gazing at the ¦ 
•mountains and the trees, even at faces, as though ,to memorize 
them for eternity. . . • - ¦ 

He saved his visit to the Trask place for last. He had not been . 

278 , ¦ . 


there for months. Adam was not a young man any more. .The 
boys were eleven years bid, and Lee-well,. Lee did not change 
much. Lee walked to the shed with Samuel. 

‘I’ve wanted to talk to you for a long time,’ said Lee. ‘But 
there’s so much to do. And I try to get to San Francisco at least 
once a month.’ 

‘You know how it is,’ Samuel said. ‘When you know a friend 
is there you do not go to seek him. Then he’s gone and you blast 
your conscience to shreds that you did not see him.’ 

‘I heard about your daughter. I’m sorry.’ 

‘I got your letter, Lee. I have it. You said good things.’ - 

.‘Chinese things,’ said Lee. ‘I seem to get more Chinese as I get 
older.’ 


‘There’s something changed about you, Lee. What is it?’ 

‘It’s my queue, Mr Hamilton. I’ve cut off my queue.’ 

‘That’s it.’ 

‘We aU did. Haven’t you heard? The Dowager Empress is 
gone. China is free. The Manchus arc not overlords and we do 
not wear queues. It was a proclamation of the new government. 
There’s not a queue left anywhere.’ 

‘Does it make a difference, Lee?’ 

‘Not much. It’s easier. But there’s a kind of looseness on the 
scalp that makes me uneasy. It’s hard to get used to the con- 
venience of it.’ 

‘How is Adam?’ 

‘He’s all right. But he hasn’t changed much. I wonder what he 
was like before.’' 

‘Yes, I’ve wondered about that. It was a short flowering. The 
boys must be big.’ 

‘They are big. I’m glad I stayed here. I learned a great deal 
from seeing the boys grow and helping a little.’ 

‘Did you teach them Chinese?’ 

‘No. Mr Trask didn’t want me to.- And I guess he w^ right. 
It would have been a needless complication. But I’m their friend 
- yes, I’m their friend. They admire their father, but I think they 
love me. And they’re very different. You can’t imagine how 
d^erent’ ' ¦ 


‘Inwhatway, Lee?’ , , 

You’ll see when they come home from schoo . ^ , 

to sides. of a medal. Cal is sharp and dark and «'atchful,. and 
is brother— well, he’s a boy you like befor 


more afterwards.’ 


' And you don’t like Cal?’ 


279 



‘I find myself defending him— to myself. He’s fighting for h'lS 

life. and his brother doesn’t have to fight.’ 

‘I liavc the Same tiling in my brood.’ said Samuel. ‘I don’t 
understand it. You’d think with the same training and tlie same 
blood thej'’d-be alike, but'they’re not -not at alL’ 

¦ Later Samuel and Adam walked down the oak-shadowed road 
to the entrance to the draw where they could look out at the 
Salinas Valley. 

, ‘Will you stay to dinner,’ Adam asked. • 

• 'I will not be responsible for the murder of more chickens,’- 
said Samuel. 

" ^ ‘Lee’s got a pot roast.’ 

‘Well, in that case — ’ 

Adam still carried one shoulder lower than the other from the 
old hurt. His face was hard and curtained, and his e.ves looked 
at generalities and did not inspect details. The two men stopped 
in the ro.ad and looked out at the valley, green-tinged from the, 
early rains. 

said softly, ‘I wonder you do not feel a shame at leav- 
ing that land fallow.’ 

• ‘I had no reason to plant it,’ Adam said. ‘We liad that out 
before. You thought I would cliange, 1 have not cltanged.’ 

‘Do 5 ’ou take pride in your hurt?’ Samuel asked. ‘Does it • 
make you seem large and tragic?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Well, think about it. Maybe you’re playing a part on a great 
stage with only yourself as audience.’ 

A slight anger came into Adam's voice. ‘Why do you come to 
lecture me? I’m glad you’ve come, but why do you dig into 
me?’ 

‘To see whether I can raise a little anger in j'ou. Fm a nosy 
man. But there’s all that fallow land, and here beside me is all 
that fallow man. It seems a waste. And I have a bad feeling 
about waste because I could never afford it. Is it a good feeling 
to let your life h'e fallow ?’ 

‘What else could I do?’ 

‘You could try again.’ 

Adam faced him. ‘I’m afraid to, Samuel,’ he said. ‘I’d rather 
just go about it this way. Alaybe I haven’t the energt- or the 
courage.’ , - 

iHow about your boys - do you love them?’ 

‘Y^-j-es,’. 

‘Do you love one more than the other?’ 

2S0 



‘Why do you say that?’ 

‘I don’t know. Something about your tone.’ 

‘Let’s go' back to the house/ said Adam. They strolled back 
under the trees. Suddenly Adam said, ‘Did you ever hear that 
Cathy was in Salinas? Did you ever hear such a rumour?’ 

‘Did you?’ 

‘Yes - but I don’t believe it. I can’t believe it.’ 

Samuel walked silendy in the sandy wheel-rut of the road. His 
mind turned sluggishly in the pattern of Adam and almost 
wearily took up a thought he had hoped was finished. He said at 
last, ‘You have never let her go.’ 

‘I guess not. But I’ve let the shooting go. I don’t think about 
it any more.’ 

‘I can’t tell'you how to live your life,’ Samuel said, ‘although 
I do be telling you how to live it. I know that it might be better 
for you to come out from under your might-have-beens, into 
the winds of the world. And while I tell you, I am myself sift- 
ing my memories, the way men pan the dirt under a bar-room 
floor for the bits of gold dust that fall between the cracks. It’s 
small mining -small mining. You’re too young a man to be 
panning memories, Adam. You should be getting yourself some 
ne\v ones,' so that the mining will be richer when you come to 
age.’ 

, Adam’s face was bent' down, and his jawbone jutted below his 
temples from clenching. 

Samuel glanced at him. ‘That’s right,’ he said. ‘Set your teeth 
in it. How we do defend a wrongness! Shall I tell you what to 
do, so you will not think you invented it? When you go to bed 
¦' and blow out the lamp— then she stands in tlic doory/ay with a 
little light behind her, and you can sec her nightgown stir. And 
she comes sweetly to your bed, and you, hardly breathing, turn 
back the covers to receive her and move your head ovct on the 
pillow to make room for her head beside yours. You can smell 
the sweetness of her skin, and it smells liltc no other skin in the 
world — ’ 

Stop it/ Adam shouted at him. ‘Goddam you, mop it ! .Stop 

nosing over my life! You’re ISk a covote sniffing aro-jnd z drad 
cow.’ ' 


The way I Imow/ Samuel said coftiv, ‘i:. that one can 
that selfsame way— night after month after year, 

'cry now. .And I think I skould have do'jhle-holt.ed rr 
and s^led og my heart again.-.' her, fat J did not. A!: 
.'tars I ve cheated Lizs. IVe gr/en her an a oo-/ 


i.e to roe 
t to rfa 
:y r.ci.o.'; 
(if ?i;ooe 


nterfei’^ 


2il 



and I’ve saved the best for those dark sweet hovurs. And now 1 
could wish that she may liave had some secret caller too. But I’l 
never know that. I think she would maybe have bolted' her, hear 
shut and thrown the key to hell.’ i 

Adam’s hands were clenched and the blood was driven out o' 
his white knuckles. ‘You make me doubt myself/ he said fiercely 
‘You’ always have. I’m afraid of you. What should 1 do^ Samueli 
Tell me! I don’t know how j’ou saw the thing so clear, Whal 
should Ido?’ - , / 

-‘I know the “shoulds”,' although I never do tliem, Adam. 1 
always know the “shoulds”. You should try to find a new Cathy 
You should let the new Cathy kill the dream Cathy -let the t\yc 
of them fight it out. And you, sitting by, should marry yoin 
mind to the winner. That’s the second-best “should”. The best 
would be to search out and find some fresh new loveliness tc 
cancel out the old.’ 

‘I’m afraid to try,’ said Adam. 

‘That’s what you’ve said. And now I’m going to put a selfish- 
ness on you. I’m going away, Adam. I came to say goodbye.' , 
‘What_do you mean?' 

‘My daughter Olive has asked Li^ and me to Visit with her in 
Salinas, and Xve’re going- day after tomorrow.’ , 

‘Well, you’U be back.’ ; , 

Samuel went on, ‘After we’ve visited with Olive for maybe a 
month or two, there will come a letter from George. And his 
feelings will be hurt if we don’t visit him in Paso Robles. And 
after that Mollie will want us in San Francisco, and then Will; 
and maybe even Joe in the East, if we should live so long.’; 

‘Well, won’t you like that? You’ve earned it. You’ve worked 
hard enough on that dust heap of yours.’ / 

‘I love that dust heap,’ Samuel said. ‘I love it the way a bitch 
loves her runty pup. I love’ every flint, the plough-breaking out- 
croppings, the thin and barren topsoil, the waterless heart of her. 
Somewhere in my. dust heap there’s a richness.’ - ’ 

‘You deserve a rest.’ 

‘There, you’ve said it again,’ said Samuel. ‘That’s what I had 
to accept, and I have accepted. When you say I deserve a rest, 
you are saying that my life is over,’ 

‘Do you believe that?’ 

‘That’s what I have accepted.’ . • 

Adam said excitedly, ‘You can’t do that. Why, if you accept 
that you won’t live! ’ 

‘I know/ said Samuel. 


282 



' ‘But you can’t do that.’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘I don’t want you to.’ 

‘I’m a nosy old man, Adam. And the sad thing to me is that 
I’m losing my nosiness. That’s maybe how I know it’s time to 
visit my children. I’m having to pretend to be nosy a good deal 
of the time.’ 

‘I’d rather you worked your guts out on j’’our dust heap.’ 

Samuel smiled- at him. ‘What a nice thing to hear! And I 
thank 5^00. It’s a good thing to be loved, even late.’ 

Suddenly Adam turned in front of him so that Samuel had' 
to stop. ‘I know what you’ve done for me,’ Adam said. T can’t 
return anything. But I can ask you for one more thing. If I 
asked you, would you do me one more kindness, and maybe save 
my life?’ 

‘I would if I could.’ 

. Ad^ swimg out his hand and made an arc over the west. 
‘That land out there -would you help me to make the garden 
we talked of, the windmills and the wells and the flats of alfalfa? 
We could raise flower-seeds. There’s money in that. Think of 
what it would be like, acres of sweet peas and gold squares of 
calendulas. Maybe ten acres of roses for the gardens of the West. 
Think how they would smell on the west wind ! ’ 

‘You’re going to make me cry,’ Samuel said, ‘and that would 
be an unseemly thing in an old man.’ And indeed his eyes were 
wet. ‘I thank you, Adam,’ he said. ‘The sweetness of your offer 
is a good smell on the west wind.’ 

. ‘Then you’ll do it?’ 

‘No, I will not do it. But I’ll see it in my mind when I’m in 
Salinas, listening to William Jennings Bryan. And maybe I’ll get 
to believe it happened.’ 

“But I want to do it.’ 

‘Go and see my Tom. He’ll help you. He’d plant the world 
with roses, poor man, if he could.’ 

, ‘You know what you’re doing, Samuel?’ 

, I know what I’m doing, know so weU that it’s half 

- done.’ , . . 

‘What a stubborn man you are ! ’ 

‘Contentious,’ .said Samuel. ‘Liza says I’m contentious, but 
, now I’m caught in a web of my children — and I think I like 
it.’ ¦ 


¦283 



. IX 

The dinner-table was set in the house. Lee said, T’d have liked to 
serve it under the tree like the other times, but tlie air is chilly,' ¦ 

‘So it is, Lee,’ said Samueh 

The twins came in silently and stood shyly staring at their ‘ 
guest. ' , ' 

.‘It’s a long time since I’ve seen you, boys. But we named you 
well. You’re Caleb, aren’t you?’ 

.‘I’m Cal.’ 

‘Well, Cal, then.’ And he turned to the other. ‘Have you 
found a way to rip the backbone out of your" name?’ 

. ‘Sir?’ 

‘Are you called Aaron?’ 

•Yes, sir.’ 

Lee chuckled. ‘He spells it with one a. The two a’s seem a 
little fancy to his friends.’ 

‘I’ve got thirty-five Belgian hares, sir,’ Aron said. ‘Would you 
like to see tliem, sir? The hutch is up by the spring. I've got 
eight new-boms - just born yesterday.’ 

‘I’d like to see them, Aron.’ His mouth twitched. ‘Cal, don’t 
tell me you’re a gardener?' 

Lee’s head snapped round and he inspected Samuel. ‘Don’t 
do that,’ Lee said nervously. 

Cal said, ‘Next year my father is going to let me have an acre 
in the flat.' 

Aron said, ‘I've got a buck rabbit weighs fifteen pounds. I’m 
going to give it to my father for his birthday.’ 

They heard Adam’s bedroom door opening. ‘Don’t tell him,’ ' 
Aron said quickly. 'It’s a secret.’ 

Lee sawed at the pot roast, ‘Always you bring trouble .for my 
mind, Mr Hamilton,’ he said. ‘Sit down, boys.’ 

. Adam came in, turning down his sleeves, and took his seat at^ 
the head of the table. ‘Good evening, boys,’ he said, and they re- 
plied in unison, ‘Good evening, Father.’ 

And, ‘Don’t you tell,’ said Aron. 

' ‘I won’t,’ Samuel assured him. 

‘Don’t tell what?’ Adam asked. - • 

Samuel said, ‘Can’t there be a privacy? I have a secret with 
your son.’ ; ' 

Cal broke in, ‘I’ll tell you a secret too, right after dinner.’ "" 

‘I’ll like to hear it,’ said Samuel. ‘And I do hone I don’t know 
already what it is.’ 


284 



Lee looked up from his carving and glared at Samuel. He be- 
gan piling meat on the plates. 

The boys ate quickly and quietly, wolfed their food. Aron 
said, ‘Will you excuse us. Father?’ 

Adam nodded, and the two boys went quickly out. Samuel 
looked after them. ‘They seem older than eleven,’ he said. ‘I 
seem to remember that at eleven my brood were howlers and 
screamers and runners in circles. These seem like grown men.’ 

• ‘Do they?’ Adam asked. 

Lee said, ‘I think I see why that is. There is, no woman in the 
house to put a value on babies. I don’t think men care much for , 
babies, and so it was never an advantage to these boys to be 
babies. There was nothing to gain by it. I don’t know whether 
that is good or bad.’ 

Samuel wiped up the remains of gravy in his plate with a 
slice of bread. ‘Adam, I wonder whether you know what you 
have in Lee. A philosopher who can cook, or a cook who can 
think? He has taught me a great deal. You must have learned 
from him, Adam.’ 

Adam said, ‘I’m afraid I didn’t listen enough -or maybe he 
didn’t talk.’ 

‘Why didn’t you want the boys to learn Chinese, Adam?’ 

Adam thought for a moment. ‘It seems a time for honesty,’ he 
said at last. ‘I guess it was plain jealousy. I gave it another 
name, but maybe I didn’t want them to be able so easily to go 
away from me in a direction I couldn’t follow.’ 

‘That’s - reasonable enough and almost too human,’ said 
Samuel. ‘But knowing it -that’s a great jump. I wonder whe- 
ther I have ever gone so far.’ 

Lee brought ^e grey enamelled coffee-pot to the table and 
filled the cups and sat down. He warmed the palm of his hand 
against the roimded side of his cup. And then Lee laughed. 
You’ve given me great trouble, Air Hamilton, and you’ve dis- 
turbed the tranquillity of China.’ 

‘How do you mean, Lee?’ 

. ‘It almost seems that I have told you this,’ said Lee. ‘Maybe I 
only composed it in my mind, meaning to teU you. It’s an 
amusing story anyway".’ 

‘I want to hear,’ said Samuel, and he looked at Adam. ‘Don t 
you want to hear, Adam? Or are you slipping into your cloud 
bath?’ 

¦ ‘I was thinking of that,’ said Adam. ‘It’s funny -a kind of 
excitement is coming over me.’ 


285 



‘That’s good,’ said Samuel. ‘Maybe that’s the. best of aih good, 
things that can happen to a human. Let’s hear your story, Lee.’ , 

The Chinese reached to the side of his neck and he smiled. ‘I 
wonder whether I’ll ever get used to the lack of a queue,’ he said. 

‘1 guess I used it . more than ! knew. Yes, the story. I told .you, 
Mr Hamilton,' that I was growing more Chinese.. Do you ever . 
grow more'Irish?’ , 

‘It comes and goes,’ said Samuel. 

‘Do you remember when you read us the sixteen verses of the ' 
fourth chapter of Genesis and we argued about them?’ . 

. ‘I do indeed. And that’s a long time ago.’ 

. ‘Ten years nearly,’ said Lee. ‘Well, the story bit deeply into me 
nd I went into it word for word. The more I thought about the 
tory, the more profound it became to me. Then I compared the- 
ranslations we have - and they were fairly close. There was only 
me place that bothered me. The King James version says this- • 
t is when Jehovah has asked Cain why he is angry. Jehovah , 
ays, “If thou doest well, slialt thou not be accepted? and if 
hou doest not well, sin licth at the door. And unto thee shall be, 
lis desire, and thou shah rule over him.” It was the “thou shalt” - 
hat struck me, because it was a promise that Cain would con- 
juer sin.’ 

Samuel nodded. ‘And his children didn’t do it entirely/ he 
aid. t . . • • 

Lee sipped his coffee. ‘Then I got a copy of the American- 
Jtandard Bible. It was very new then. And it was different in' 
his passage. It says, “Do thou rule over him.” Now this is very 
iifferent. This is not a promise, it is an order. And I began to 
;tew about it. I wondered what the original word of the original 
vriter had been that these very different translations could be 
nade.’ 

, Samuel put his palms down on the table and leaned forward 
ind the old young light came into his eyes. ‘Lee,’ he said, ‘don’t • ' 
ell me j’ou studied Hebrew ! ’ ' , , . 

,Lee said, ‘I’m going to tell you. And it’s a fairly long story. ¦ 
l'7ill you have a touch of ng-ka-py?’ 

‘You mean the drink that tastes of good rotten apples?’ . . . 

‘Yes. I can talk better with it.’ 

‘Maybe I can listen better,’ said Samuel. 

While Lee went to the kitchen Samuel asked, ‘Adam, did you 
know about this?’ 

‘No,’, said Adam. ‘He didn’t tell me. Maybe I wasn’t listening.’ ¦ 

Lee came back with his stone bottle and three little porcelain ¦ 

286 , • . 


cups so thin and delicate that the light shone through them. 
‘Dlinkee Chinee fashion/ he said and poured the almost black 
liquor. ‘There’s a lot of wormwood in this. It’s quite a drink/ he 
said. ‘Has about the same effect as absinthe if you drink enough 
of it.’ 

Samuel sipped his drink. ‘I want to know why you were so 
interested/ he said. 

‘Well, it seemed to me that the man who could conceive this 
great story would know exactly what he wanted to say and there 
would be no confusion in his statement.’ 

‘You say “the man”. Do you then not think this is a divine 
book written by the inky finger of God?’ 

‘I think the mind that could think this story was a cmriously 
divine mind. We have had a few such minds in China too.’ 

‘I just wanted to know/ said Samuel. ‘You’re not a Presby- 
terian after all.’ 

. ‘I told you I w'as getting more Chinese. Well, to go on, I went 
to San Francisco to the headquarters of our family association. 
Do you know about them? Our great families have centres where 
any member can get help or give it. The Lee family is very 
large. It takes care of its own.’ 

¦ ‘I have heard of them/ said Samuel. 

‘You mean Chinee hatchet man fightee Tong war over slave 
girl?’ 

‘I guess so.’ 

‘It’s a little different from that, really/ said Lee. ‘I went there 
because in' our family there are a number of ancient reverend 
gentlemen who are great scholars. They are thinkers in exact- 
ness. A man may spend many years pondering a sentence of the 
scholar you call Confucius. I thought there might be experts in 
meaning who could advise me. 

‘They are fine old men. They smoke their two pipes of opium 
in the afternoon and it rests and sharpens them, and they sit 
through the night and their minds arc wonderful. I guess no 
other people have been able to use opium well.’ 

Lee dampened his tongue in the black brew. ‘I respectfully 
submitted my problem to one of these sages, read him the story, 
and told him what I understood from it. The next night four of 
them met and called me in. Wc discussed the story all night 
long.’ 

Lee laughed. ‘I guess it’s funny/ he said. ‘I know I woulc’ 
dare tell it to many people. Can you imagine four old gentle’ 
the youngest is over ninety now, taking on the stu( 

287 



They engaged a learned rabbi. They took to the study as though 
they were children. Exercise books, grammar, vocabulary, simple 
sentences. You should see' Hebrew rvritten in Chinese ink with , 
a brush! The right to left didn't bother them as much, as it 
would you, since we write up to down. Oh, they were perfec- 
tionists ! They went to the root of the matter.’ _ 

‘And you?’ said Samuel. 

‘I went along with them, marvelling at the beauty of , their . 
proud clean brains. I began to love my race, and for the first 
time I wanted to be Chinese. Every two weeks I went to a meet- 
ing with them, and in my room here I covered pages with writ- , 
ing. I bought every known Hebrew dictionary. But the old gentle- , 
men were always ahead of me. It wasn’t long before th^ were 
ahead of our rabbi; he brought a colleague in. Mr Hamilton, you 
should have sat through some of those nights of argument and 
discussion. The questions, the inspection, oh, the lovely thinking 
- the beautiful thinking. 

'After two years we felt that we could approach your sixteen 
verses of the fourth chapter of Genesis. My old gentlemen felt 
that these words were very important too -“Thou shalt” and ' 
"Do thou”, ^d this was the gold from our mining: “Thou - 
nmyest.” “Thou mayest rule over sin.” The old gentlemen , ' 
smiled and nodded and felt the years were well spent. It brought 
them out of their Chinese shells too, and right now they are 
studying Greek.’ 

Samuel said, ‘It’s a fantastic story. And I’ve fried to. '"follow 
and maybe I’ve missed somewhere. Why is this word so im- 
portant?’ 

Lee’s hand shook as he filled the delicate cups. He drank his 
down in one gulp. ‘Don’t you see?’ he cried. ‘The American 
Standard translation orders men to triumph over sin, and yoii 
can call sin ignorance. The King James translation makes a pro- 
mise in “Thou shalt”, meaning that men wiU surely triumph 
over sin. But the Hebrew word, the word timshc}-“Thou . 
mayest” - that gives a choice. It might be the most important 
word in the world. That says the way is open. That throws it 
right back on a man. For if “Thou mayest” - it is also true that 
“Thou mayest not”. Don’t you see?’ 

‘Yes, I see. I do see. But you do nor beliet'e this is divine law. 
Why do you feel its importance?’ 

‘Ahl’ said Lee. ‘I’ve wanted to tell you this for a long time. I 
even anticipated your questions and I am well prepared. .Any 
writing which has influenced the thinking and the lives of in- 

288 , • 


numerable people is important. Now, there arc many millions in 
their sects and Churches who feel the order, “Do thou”, and 
throw their weight into obedience. And there arc millions more 
who feel predestination in “Thou shalt”. Nothing they may do 
can interfere with .what will be. But “Thou maycst” ! Why, that 
makes a man great, that gives him stamre with the gods, for in 
his weakness and his filth and his murder of his brother he has 
still the great choice. He can choose his course and fight it 
through and win.’ Lee’s voice was a chant of triumph. 

Adam said, ‘Do you believe that, Lee?’ 

‘Yes, I do. Yes, I do. It is easy out of laziness, out of weakness, 
to throw oneself into the lap of deity, saying, “I couldn’t help 
< it; the way was set.” But think of the glory of the choice ! That 
makes a man a man. A cat has no choice, a bee must make 
honey. There’s no godliness there. And do you know, those old 
gentlemen who were sliding gently down to death are too in- 
terested to die now.’ 

Adam said, ‘Do you mean these Chinese men believe the Old 
Testament?’ ^ - 

Lee said, ‘These old men believe a true story, and tliey know-s 
true story when they , hear it. They are critics of truth. They 
know that these sixteen verses are a history of htunankind in any 
age or culture or race. They do not believe a man writes fifteen 
and three-quarter verses of truth and tells a lie with one verb. 
Confucius tells men how they should live to have good and suc- 
cessful lives. But this -this is a ladder to climb to the star?.' 
Lee’s eyes shone. ‘You can never lose that. It cuts the feet fro.":; 
under weakness and cowardliness and laziness.’ 

Adam said, ‘I don’t see how you could cook and raise the beys 
and take care of me and still do all this.’ 

‘Neither do I,’ said Lee. ‘But I take my two pices in the after- 
noon, no more and no less, like the elders. .Ana I feet that I am s 
man. And I feel that a man is a very imrermn: thing -ma.vbe 
"more important than a star. This is net theefcar I hare nt 
bent towards gods. But I have a cr.r far mar ghrrmma m- 
strument, the human soul. It is a loreir ana amane rhina ia me 
universe. It is always attacked ana nerm a'eramye-a - hemaa-e 
“Thou mayest”,’ 


Lee and Adam walked our ta- me shea Tnah aaame m ;er arm 
off. Lee. carried a tin lantern ra — mrm fm n m.e n 
those clear early winter highn when the shy ¦ — n rnm mh 



the earth seems doubly dark because of them. A silence lay. on . 
the hills. No animal moved about, neither grass-eater nor preda-' 
tor, and the air was io still that the dark limbs and leaves of the . 
live o£^ stood unmoying against the Milky Way. The thr.ee men 
were silent. The bail of the tin lantern squeaked a little as the 
light swung in Lee’s hand. : , 

Adam asked, ‘When do you think you’ll be back from your 
trip?’ 

Samuel did not answer. _ . 

Doxology stood patiently in the stall, head down, his milky 
eyes staring at the straw under his feet. 

‘You’ve had that horse for ever,’ Adam said. 

' ‘He’s thirty-three,’ said Samuel. ‘His teeth are worn off. I, 
have to feed him warm mash with my fingers. And he has bad 
dreams. He shivers .and cries sometimes in his sleep.’ 

‘He’s about as ugly a crow bait as I ever saw,’ Adam said. 

‘I know it. I think that’s why. I picked him when he was a 
colt. Do you know I paid two dollars for him thirty-three years 
ago? Everything was wrong with him, hoofs like flapjacks, a 
' hock so thick and short and straight there seems no joint at all; 

, He’s hammer-headed and sway-backed. He has a pinched chest 
and a big behind. He has an iron mouth and he still fights the 
crupper. With a saddle he feels as though you were riding a sled 
over a gravel pit. He can’t trot and he stumbles over his feet 
when he walks. I have never in thirty-three years found one 
good thing about him. He even has an ugly disposition. He is 
selfish and quarrelsome and mean and disobedient. To this, day 
s. I don’t dare walk behind him because he will surely take a kick 
"at me. When I feed him mash he tries to bite my hand. And 1 
iove him.’ 

Lee said, ‘And you named him “Doxology".’ 

‘Surely,’ said Samuel, ‘so ill endowed a creature deserved, ! 
thought, one grand possession. He hasn’t very long now.’ 

Adam said, ‘Maybe you should put him out of his misery.’. 

‘What misery?’ Samuel demanded. ‘He’s one of the few happy 
and consistent beings I’ve ever met.’ 

, .‘He must have aches and pains.’ 

.W?ell, he doesn’t think so. Doxology still thinks he’s one heU 
of a horse. Would you shoot him, Adam?’ 

‘Yes, I tliink I would. Yes, I would.’ 

‘You’d take the responsibility?’ 

‘Yes, I thinie I would. He’s thirty-three. His life-span is long 
oveir.’ ' • 


290 




when a dog . has' eaten strychnine and is going to die, you must 
get ah axe and capy him to a chopping block. Then you, must 
wait for his next commlsion, and in tfpt moment— chop off his 
tail. Then, if the poison has not gone too far, your -dog may 
cover. The shock of pain can counteract the poison. Without the ¦ 
shock he will surely die.’ 

‘But how do you Imow this is the same?’ Lee asked. 

‘I don’t. But without it he would surely die.’ 

, ‘You’re a brave man,’ Lee said. 

. ‘No, I’m an bid man. And if I should have anything on my 
conscience it won’t be for long.’ 

¦ Lee asked, ‘What do you suppose he’ll do?’ 

‘1 don’t know,’ said Samuel, ‘but at least he won’t sit arovmd . 
and mope. Here, hold the lantern for me, will you?’ 

In the yellow light Samuel slipped the bit in Doxology’s 
mouth, a bit worn so thin that it was a flake of steel. The check 
rein had been abandoned long ago. The old hammerhead was ' 
free to drag his nose if he wished, or to pause and crop grass 
beside the road. Samuel didn’t care. Tenderly he buckled the 
crupper, and'-the horse edged round to try to kick him. , ¦ ' 

When Dox was between the shafts of the cart Lee asked, 
‘Would you mind if I rode along with you a little. I’ll walk . 
back.’ 

‘Come along,’ said Samuel, and he tried not to notice that Lee = 
helped him up into the cart. 

The night was very dark, and Dox showed his disgust for 
. night-travelling by stumbling every few steps. 

Samuel said, ‘Get on with it, Lee. What is it you want to 
say?’. 

Lee did not appear surprised. ‘Maybe I’m nosy the way you 
.'say you are. I get to thinking. I know probabilities, but tonight 
. you fooled me completely. I would have taken any bet that you 
of all men would not have told Adam.’ 

‘Did you know about her?’ 

, ‘Of course,’ said Lee. 

‘D o the boy s know ? ’ 

- ‘I don’t think so, but that’s only a matter of time. You know 
how cruel children are. Some day in the school-yard it will be 
shouted at them.’ 

‘Maybe he ought to take them away from here,’ said Samuel. . 
‘Think about that, Lee.’ 

‘My question isn’t answered, Mr Hamilton. How were you 
able to do what you did?’ 

292 


‘Do you tliink I was that wrong?’ 

‘No, I don’t mean that at all. But I’ve never thought of you ns 
, ajdng.any strong unchanging stand on anything. This has been 
ny judgement. Are you inter^tedP’ 

‘Show me the man who isn’t interested in discussing himself/ 
said Samuel. ‘Go on.’ 

‘You’re a kind man, Mr Hamilton. And I’ve always thought it 
was the kindness that comes from not wanting any trouble. And 
j-our mind is as facile as a young lamb leaping in a daisy field. 
Vou have never to my knowledge taken a bulldog grip on any- 
;hing. And, then tonight you did a thing that tears down my 
whole picture of you.’ 

Samuel wrapped the lines around a stick stuck in the whip 
, socket, and Doxology stumbled on down the rutty road. The old 
man stroked his beard, and it shone very white in the starlight. 
He took off his black hat and laid it in his lap. ‘I guess it sur- 
prised me as much as it did you/ he said. ‘But if you want to 
know why - look into yourself.’ 

! ‘I don’t understand you.’ 

. ‘If you had only told me about your studies earlier it might 
have made a great difference, Lee.’ 

‘I still don’t understand you.’ 

‘Careful, Lee, you’ll get me talking. I told you my Irish came 
and went. It’s coming now.’ 

Lee said, ‘Mr Hamilton, you’re going away and t-ou're not 
coming back. You do not intend to live very much longer. 

! ‘That’s true, Lee. How did you know?’ 

I ‘There’s death all around you. It shines from you.' 
i ‘I didn’t know anyone could see it,’ Samuel saio. Teu -know, 
Lee, I think of^my life as a kind of music, nor alijnys good 
music but still having form and melody. .And ir.y lire nas not 
been a full orchestra for a long time now. A smgle note only - 
and that note unchanging sorrow. I’m not alone in my amtuae, 
Lee. It seems to me that too many' of us conceive or a life as end- 
ing in defeat.’ 

s Lee said, ‘Maybe everyone is too rich. I have nonoed mat 
there is no dissatisfaction like that of the rich. Feen a man. 


clothe him, put him in a good house, ana he will die 
1 ‘It was your two- word re- translation, Lee -“The 


c: 



It took me by the throat and shook me: And when ±e dhninms 
jwas over, a, path was open, new and bright. -And my lit? whdnh 
p ending seems to be going on to an ending wcndetfnl .And my 
tnusic has a new last melody I&e a bird senn in me ninmi" 

' 2 - - ¦ ' 


Lee was peering at 5iim through the darkness.' ‘That's wliat it : ¦ 
did to those old nien of my family.’ ” . ' 

‘ “Thou mayest rule ovw sin”, Lee. That’s it. I do not believe • 
all men are destroyed. I can name you a dozen who were not, 
and they are the, ones the world lives by. It is ttue of the spirit 
as it is mie of battles -only the winners are remembered. Surdy 
ihost men. are destroyed, but there are odiers who like pillars of 
fire guide frightened men through the darkness. “Thou mayest. 
Thou mayest!” What glory! It is true that we are weak and 
sick and quarrelsome, but if that is all we were, we would, mfil- , 
enniums ago, have disappeared from the face of the earth. A few ' 
remnants of fossilized jawbone, some broken teeth in strata of 
limestone, would be the only mark man would have left of his 
existetice in the world. But the choice, Lee, the choice of win- 
ning! I had never understood it or accepted it before. Do you 
see now why I told Adam tonight? I e.\'ercised the choice. Maybe '' 
Irwas wrong, but by telling him I also forced him to live or get 
off the pot. What is that word, Lee?’ 

‘Timshel/ said Lee. ‘Will you stop the cart?’ 

‘You'll have a long walk back.' 

Lee climbed down. ‘Samuel ! ’ he said. 

‘Here am 1.’ The old man chuckled. ‘Liza hates for me to say. ¦ 
that.’ 

‘Samuel, you’ve gone beyond me.’ ' ¦ • • , 

‘It’s time, Lee.’ ^ 

'Goodbye, Samuel,’ Lee said, and he walked hurriedly back 
along the road. He heard the iron tyres of the cart grinding on ¦ 
the road. He turned and looked after it, and on the slope he saw . 
old Samuel against the sky, his white hair shming with starlight. ' 


CHAPTER 25 

• ; I 

It was a deluge of a winter in the Salinas Valley, wet and 
wundcrfol. The rains fell gently and soaked in and did not 
freshet. The feed was deep in January, and in Pebruarj’ the hills 
were fat with grass and the coats of the cattle looked tight and 
sleek. In March the soft rains continued, and each storm waited ¦ 
courteously until its predecessor sank beneath the ground. Then 

. ¦ , ' . 294 


warmth flooded the valley and the earth burst into bloom - yel- 
low and blue and gold. - 

^ Tom was alone on the ranch, and even that dust heap was 
rich and lovely and the flints were hidden in grass and the 
Hamilton cows were fat and the Hamilton sheep sprouted grass 
from their damp backs.' 

At noon on March 15 Tom sat on the bench outside the forge. 
The sunny morning was over, and grey water-bearing clouds 
sailed in over the mountains from the ocean, and their shadows 
slid under them on the bright earth. 

Tom heard a horse’s clattering hoofs and he saw a small boy, 
elbows flapping, turging a tired horse towards the house. He 
stood up and walked towards the road. The boy galloped up to 
the house, yanked off his hat, flung a yellow envelope on the 

- ^ound, spun his horse round, and kicked up a gallop again. 

Tom started to call after him, and then he leaned wearily 
down and picked up the telegram. He sat in the sim on the 
¦ bench outside the forge, holding the telegram in his hand. And 
he looked at the hills and at the old house, as though to save 
something, before he tore open the envelope and read the in- 
. evitable four words, the person, the event, and the time. ^ 

Tom slowly folded the telegram and folded it again and again 
until it was a square no longer than his thumb. He walked to the 
house, through the kitchen, through the little living-room, and 
into his bedroom. He took his dark suit out of the clothes-press 
and laid it over the back of a chairs and he put a white shirt and 
a black tie on the seat of the chair. And then he lay down on the 
bed and turned his face to the wall. 

II 

The surreys and the buggies had driven out of the Salinas ceme- 
tery. The family and friends went back to Olive's house on 

- Central Avenue to eat and drink coffee, to see hotv each one was 
taking it, and to do and say the decent things. 

George offered Adam Trask a lift in his rented surrey, but 
Adam refused. He wandered around the cemetery and sat down 
on the cement kerb of the Williams family plot. The traditional 
dark cypresses wept around the edge of the cemetery, and white 
violets ran wild in the pathways. Someone had brought them iri 
and they had become weeds. 

The cold wind blew over the tombstones and cried in^e 
cypresses. There were many cast-iron stars, marking’ the ^ 

295 ' ' 



of Grand Andy men, and on each star a smallAvind-bittcn flag 
from a year ago Decoration Day. .¦ 

' Adam .'sat looking at the' mountains to the east of Salinas, ivith 
, the noble point of Premdnfs- Peak, dominating. ! The air was 
cr3'stalline, as it sometimes is when rain is coming. And tlien the 
light rain began to blow on the wind although the sky was not 
properly covered with cloud. ¦ • 

Adam - had come up on the morning train. He had not in- 
.• tended to come at all, but something drew him beyond his poxver 
to resist. For one thing, he could not believe that Samuel was 
dead; He could hear the rich, lyric voice in his ears, the tones 
rising and falling in their foreignness, and the curious music of 
oddly chosen words tripping out so that you were never sure 
what the next word would be. In the speech of most men you 
are absolutely sure what the next word will be. 

. Adam had looked at Samuel 'in his casket and knav that he 
didn’t want him to be dead. And since the face in the casket did 
not look like Samuel’s face, Adam walked away to be by him- 
self and to preserve the man alive. 

He had to go to the cemetery. Custom would have been out- 
raged else. But he stood well back where he could not hear the 
words, and when the sons filled in the grave he walked away and 
strolled in the paths where the white violets grew. 

The cemetery was deserted and the dark crooning of the wind 
bowed the heavy cypress trees. The rain droplets grew larger and 
drove stinging along. 

Adam stood up, shivered, and walked slowly over the white 
violets and past the new grave. The flowers had been laid evenly 
to cover the moimd of new-turned damp earth, and already the 
wind had frayed the blossoms and flung the smaller bouquets 
out into the path. Adam picked them up and laid them back on' 
the mound. 

. He walked out of the cemetery. The wind and tlie rain were at 
his back, and he ignored the wetness tltat soaked through his 
black coat. Romie Lane was muddy with pools of water stand- 
ing in the new wheel-ruts, and the tall wild oats and mustard 
grew beside the road, with wild turnip forcing its boisterous way 
up and stickery beads of purple thistles rising above the green 
riot of the wet spring.' 

The black ’dobe mud covered Adam’s shoes and splashed the 
bottoms of his dark trousers. It was nearly a mile to the Mon- 
terey road. Adam was dirty and soaking when he reached it and 
turned east into the town of Salinas. The water was stahding in . 

296 



the curved bnrn. of his derby hat and his collar was wet and 
sagging. , 

At John Street the road angled and became Main Street. 
Adam stamped the mud off his shoes when he reached the pave- 
ment. The buildings cut the wind from him and almost instantly 
he began to shake with a chill. He increased his speed. Near the 
other end of Main Street he turned into the Abbot House bar. 
He ordered brandy and drank it quickly and his shivering in- 
creased. 

Mr Lapierre behind the bar saw the chill. ‘You’d better have 
another one/ he said. ‘You’ll get a bad cold. Would you like a 
hot rum? That will knock it out of you.’ 

‘Yesj 1 would/ said Adam. 

‘Wellj here. You sip another cognac while I get some hot 
water.’ 

Adam took his glass to a table and sat uncomfortably in his 
wet clothes; Mr Lapierre brought a steaming kettle from the 
kitchen. He put the squat glass on a tray and brought it to the 
table. ‘Drink it as hot as you can stand it/ he said. ‘That will 
shake the chill out of an aspen.’ He drew a chair up, sat down, 
then stood up. ‘You’ve made me cold/ he said. ‘I’m going to 
have one myself.’ He brought his glass back to the table and sat 
opposite Adam. ‘Ifs working/ he said. ‘You were so pale you 
scared me when you came in. You’re a stranger.?’ 

‘I’m from near King City/ Adam said. 

‘Come up for the funeral?’ 

‘Yes - he was an old friend.’ 

‘Big funeral?’ 

‘Oh, yes.’ 

‘I’m not surprised. He had lots of friends. Too bad it couldn’t 
have been a nice day. You ought to have one more and then go 
.to bed.’ ^ 

‘I will/ said Adam. ‘It makes me comfortable and peace- 
ful.’ 

‘That’s worth something. Might have saved you from pneu- 
monia too.’ 

After he had served another toddy he brought a damp cloth 
from behind the bar. ‘You can wipe off some of that mud,’ he 
said. ‘A funeral isn’t very gay, but when it gets rained on -that’s 
'• really mournful.’ 

‘It didn’t rain till after/ said Adam. ‘It was walking back I got 

wet.’ ' ¦ . t- j 

‘Why don’t you get a nice room right here? You get mto bed 

297 


and Fil send' a toddy up to '.you, and in the momirig you’ll be 
¦fine.’' . . : , • • ' ' ¦ 

.‘I think Fll do that/ said Adam.' He could feel the blood sting- 
ing his cheeks and running hotly in his arms, as though it were 
some foreign warm fluid taking over his body. Then the warmth 
riiclted through into the cold concealed box where he stored .for- 
bidden thoughts, and the thoughts came timidly up to the siir- 
,face like children who do not know whether they will be received. 
Admn picked up the damp cloth and leaned'down to sponge off 
the bottoms of his trousers. The blood potmded behind his eyes. 
‘I might have one more toddy/ he said. 

Mr Lapierre said, Tf it’s for cold, you’ve had enough. But if 
you just want a drink I’ve got some old Jamaica rum. I’d rather 
you’d have that straight. It’s fifty years old. The water would 
kill the flavour.’ 

T just want a drink/ said Adam. 

' , ‘I’ll have one with you. I haven’t opened that jug in months. 
Not much call for it. This is a whisky-drinking town.’ ¦ 

¦ Adam wiped off his shoes and dropped the cloth on the floor,' 
He took a drink of the dark rum and coughed. The heavy- 
muscled drink wrapped its sweet aroma around his head and 
struck at the base of his nose like a blow. The room seemed to 
tip sideways and then right itself. 

'Good, isn’t it?’ Mr Lapierre asked. ‘But it can knock you 
over. I wouldn’t have more than one— unless of course you want, 
to get knocked over. Some do.’ 

Adam leaned his elbows on the table. He felt a garrulous- 
ness coming on him and he was frightened at the impulse. 
His voice did not sound like his voice, and his words amazed 
him. 

‘I don’t get up here much/ he said. ‘Do you know a place 
called Kate’s?’ 

‘Jesus ! That rum is better than I thought/ Mr Lapierre said, 
and he went on sternly, ‘You live on a ranch?’ 

; ‘Yes. Got a place near King City. My name’s Trask.’ 

,‘Glad to meet you. Married?’ 

‘No. Not now,’ 

¦ “Widower?’ 

“Yes.’. 

“You go to Jenny’s. Let Kate alone. That’s not good for you. 
Jenny’s is right next door. You go there and you’ll get every- 
tliing you need.’ 

‘Right next door?’ 


298 



'Sure, you go east a block and a half and turn right. Any-' 
body’ll teU you where the Line is.’ ¦ 

Adam’s tongue was getting thick. '''X^hat’s the matter with 
Kate’s?’ 

‘You go to Jenny’s,’ said Mr Lapierre. 

Ill 

It was a dirty gusty evening. Castroville Street was deep in 
sticky mud, and Chinatown was so flooded that its inhabitants 
had laid planks across the narrow street that separated their 
hutches. The clouds against the evening sky were the grey of 
rats, and the air was not damp but dank. I guess the difference 
is that dampness comes down but dankness rises up out of rot 
and fermentation. The afternoon wind had dropped away and 
left the air raw and wounded. It was cold enough to shake out 
the curtains of rum in Adam’s head without restoring his 
timidity. He walked quickly down the unpaved sidewalks, his 
eyes on the grormd to avoid stepping in puddles. The row was 
dimly lit by the warning lantern where the railroad crossed the 
street and by one small carbon-filamented globe that burned on 
the porch of Jenny’s. 

Adam had his instructions. He counted two houses and nearly 
missed the third, so high and xmbridled were the dark bushes in 
front of it. He looked in through the gateway at the dark porch, 
slowly opened the gate, and went up the overgrown path. In the 
half-^rkness he could see the sagging dilapidated porch and 
the shaky steps. 

The paint had long disappeared from the clapboard walls and 
.no work had ever been done on the garden. If it had not been 
for die vein of light around the edges of the drawn blinds he 
would have passed on, thinking the house deserted. The stair 
treads seemed to crumple under his weight and the porch planks 
squealed as he crossed them. 

The front door opened, and he could see a dim figure holding 
. the knob. 

A soft voice said, ‘’Won’t you come in?’ 

The reception-room was dimly lighted by small globes set 
under rose-coloured shades. Adam could feel a thick carpet 
under his feet. He could see the shine of polished furniture and 
the gleam of gold picture frames. He got a quick impression of 
richness and order. 

The soft voice said, ‘You should have worn a raincoat. Do we 
know you?’ — 

29 ° 



‘No; you don’t/ said Adain. . 

‘Who sent you'?’ ' • • ¦ . ¦ ¦ 

‘A man at the hotel.’ Adam peered at the girl before him. She 
was dressed in black and wore no ornaments. Her face was slwrp 
- pretty and sharp. He tried to think of what animal, tvhat night ' 
prowler, she reminded him. It was some secret and predatory 

animal. • 

The girl said, ‘I’ll move nearer to a lamp if you like.’ 

‘No/ - 

She laughed. ‘Sit down -over here. You did come here for 
Mmething,. didn’t you? If you’ll tell me what you want I’ll tell 
the proper girl.’ The low voice had a precise and husky power. 
And she picked her words as one picks flowers in a mixed gar- 
den and took her time choosing. 

¦ She made Adam seem clumsy to himself. He blurted out, ‘I 
want to see Kate,’ 

‘Miss Kate is busy now. Does she expect you?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘I can take care of you, you know.’ 

‘I want to see Kate.’ 

‘Can you tell me what you want to see her about?’ 

‘No.’ 

The girl’s voice took on the edge of a blade sharpened on a 
stone. ‘You can’t see her. She’s busy. If you don’t want a girl or 
something else, 3'ou’d better go away/ 

‘Well, will 3'ou tell her I’m here?’ 

‘Does she know you?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ He felt his courage going. This was a remem- 
^ cold. ‘I don’t know. But will you tell her that Adam Trask 
.uuld like to see her? She’ll Imow then whether I know her or 
not.’ 

‘I see. Well, I’ll tell her.’ She moved silently to a door on the 
right and opened it. Adam heard a few muffled words and a man 
looked through the door. The girl left the door open so that 
Adam would know he was not alone. On one side of the room 
heavy dark portieres hung over a doorway. The girl parted the 
deep folds and disappeared. Adam sat back in his chair. Out of 
the side’ of his eyes he saw the man’s head thrust in and then , 
withdrawn. 

Kate’s private room was comfort and efficiency. It did not 
look at all like the room where Faye had lived. The walls were 
clad in saffron silk and the curtains were apple-green. It was a 
silken room - deep chairs with silk-upholstered cushions, lamps 
. - ¦ 300 



with silken shades, a broad bed at the far end of the room with 
a gleaming white satin cover on which were piled, gigantic pil- 
lows. There was no pictture on the wall, no photograph or per- 
sonal thing of any kind. A dressing-table near the bed had ho 
bottle or vial on its ebony top, and its sheen was reflected in 
triple mirrors. The rug was old and deep and Chinese, an apple- 
green dragon on saffron. One end of the room was bedroom, the 
centre social, and the other end was office -filing cabinets of 
golden oak, a large safe, black with gold lettering, and a roll-top 
desk with a green-hooded double lamp over it, a swivel- chair 
behind it and a straight chair beside it. 

Kate sat ‘in the swivel chair behind the desk. She was still 
pretty. Her hair was blonde again. Her mouth was little and firm 
and turned up at the comers as always. But her outlines were 
not sharp an3nvhere. Her . shoulders had become plump while her 
hands grew lean and wrinkled. Her cheeks were chubby and the 
skin under her chin was crepe. Her breasts were still tiny, but a 
padding of fat protruded her stomach a little. Her hips were 
slender, but her -legs and feet had thickened a little so that a 
bulge hung over her low shoes. And through her stockings, 
faintly, could be seen the wrappings of elastic bandage to sup- 
port the veins. — 

Still, she was pretty and neat. Only her hands had really aged, 
the palms and fingerpads shining and tight, the backs wrinkled 
and splotched with brown. She was dressed severely in a dark 
dress with long sleeves, and the only contrast was billowing 
white lace at her wrists and throat. 

The work of the years had been subtle. If one had been near- 
by it is probable that no change at all would have been noticed. 
Kate’s cheeks were unlined, her eyes sharp and shallow, her nose 
delicate, and her lips thin and firm. The scar on her forehead 
was barely visible. It was covered with a powder tinted to match 
Kate’s skm. 

Kate inspected a sheaf of photographs on her roll-top desk, aU 
the same size, all taken by the same camera and bright with flash 
powder. Arid although the characters were different in each pic- 
ture, there was a dreary similarity about their postures. The 
faces of the women were never towards the camera. 

Kate -arranged the picmres in four piles and slipped each pile 
into a heavy mahila envelope. When the knock came on her door 
she put the envelopes in a pigeon-hole of her desk. ‘Come in. 
Oh, come in, Eva. Is he here?’ 

The girl came to the desk before she replied. In the increased 

301 



light her face showed tight and her eyes were shin3^ ‘It’s a nev 
one, a stranger. He saj-s he wants to see you.’ , 

‘Well, he can’t, Eva. You. knovv .who’s coming.’ 

‘I told him j'ou couldn’t see him. He said he thought he knev 
you. ' , ' • . . 

‘Well, who is he, Eva?’ ¦ ^ 

‘He’s a big gangly man, a little bit drunk. He says his name i 
Adam .Trask.’ 

Although Kate made no movement or sound Eva knew some 
thing had struck home. The fingers of Kate’s right liand slow!; 
curled around the palm while the left hand crept like a leaj 
cat towards the edge of the desk. Kate sat still as though sh 
held her breath. Eva was jittery. Her mind went to the box L 
her dresser, drawer where her hj’podermic needle lay. 

Kate said at last, ‘Sit over there in that big chair, Eva. Just si 
still a minute.’ When the girl did not move Kate whipped on 
word at her. 'Sit! ’ Eva cringed and went to tlie big chair. 

‘iOon’t pick your nails,’ said Kate. 

. . Eva’s hands separated, and each one clung to an arm'of th 
chair. 

Kate stared straight ahead at the green glass shade of he 
desk-lamp. Then she moved so suddenly that Eva jumped ant 
her lips quivered. Kate opened the desk drawer and took out i 
folded paper. ‘Here! Go to j'our room and fix yourself up 
Don’t take it all - no, I won’t trust you.’ Kate tapped the pape: 
and tore it in tsvo; a little white powder spilled before she foldec 
the ends and passed one to Etu. ‘Now hurry up! When yoi 
^ come doumstairs, tell Ralph I want him in the hall close enougl 
‘{to hear the bell but not the voices. Watch Iiim to see he doesn’ 
creep up. If he hears the bell -no, tell him -no, let him do i 
his own way. After that bring Air Adam Trask to me.’ 

‘Will you be all right, Miss Kate?’ 

Kate looked at her until she turned awaj’. Kate called aftei 
her, Tou can have the other half as soon as he goes. Now hiur] 
up.’ 

. After the door had closed Kate opened the right-hand drawa 
of her desk and took out a revolver with a short barrel. Shi 
swung the cylinder sideways and looked at the cartridges 
snapped it shut and put it on her desk, and laid a sheet of papei 
over it. She turned off one of the lights and settled back in hej 
chair. She clasped her hands on the desk in front of her. 

When the luiock came on the door she called. ‘Come in.' 
hardly moving her lips. 


302 . 



Eva’s eyes were wet, and she was relaxed. “Here he is,’ she said, 
and closed the door behind Adam. • , 

He glanced quickly about before he saw Kate sitting so quietly 
beliind the desk. He stared at her, and then he moved slowly 
towards her. 

Her hands unclasjjed and her right hand moved towards the 
paper. Her eyes, cold and expressionless, remained on his eyes. 

Adam saw her hairj her scar, her lips, her creping throat, heir 
arms and shoulders and flat breasts. He sighed deeply. 

Kate’s hand shook a little. She said, ‘What do you want?’ 

Adam sat down in the straight chaur beside the desk. He 
wanted to shout with relief but he said, ‘Nothing now- I Just 
wanted to see you. Sam Hamilton told me you were here.’ 

The moment he sat down the shake went out of her hand. 
‘Hadn’t you heard before?’ -- 

"No,’ he said. ‘I hadn’t heard. It made me a little crazy at 
first, but now I’m all right.’ . 

Kate relaxed and her mouth smiled and her little teeth showed, 
the long canines sharp and white. She said, ‘You frightened me.’ 

‘Why?’ • 

‘Well, I didn’t know what you’d do.’ 

•Neither did I,’ said Adam and he continued to stare at her as 
though she were not alive. 

‘I expected you for a long time, and when you didn’t come I 
guess I forgot you.’ 

‘I didn’t forget you,’ he said. ‘But now I can.’ 

‘What do you mean ?’ 

He laughed pleasantly. ‘Now I see you, I mean. You know, I 
guess it was Samuel said I’d never seen you, and it’s true. I re- 
member your face but I had never seen it. Now I can forget 
it.’ 

' Her lips closed and straightened and her wide-set eyes nar- 
rowed with cruelty. ‘You think you can?’ 

‘I know I can.’ 

She changed her manner. ‘Maybe you won’t have to,’ she said. 
‘If you feel aU right about everything, maybe we could get to- 
gether.’ 

‘I don’t think so,’ said Adam. ¦ 

‘You were such a fool,’ she said. ‘Like a child. You didn’t 
know what things to do with yourself. I can teach you now. You 
seem to be a man.’ 

‘You have taught me,’ he said. ‘It was a pretty sharp lesson.’ 

‘Would you like a drink?’ 

. 303 


. ‘Yes/ lie said. ' • : . 

‘I can smell your breath -you’ve been drinidhg rum/. She got 
up and went to a cabinet for a bottle and tivo glasses, and when 
she turned back she noticed that he was looking at her fattened 
ankles. Her quick rage did not change the little smile on her lips.' - 

She carried the bottle to the round table'in the middle of the 
room and filled the two small glasses with rum. ‘Come, sit over 
here,’ she said. 'It’s, more comfortable.’ As he moved, to a big 
chair she saw that his eyes were on her protruding stomach. ;She 
h^ded hiin a glass, sat down, and folded her hands across her 
middle. 

' He sat holding his glass, and she said, ‘Drink it. It’s very good 
rum.’ He smiled at her, a smile she had never seen. She said, 
¦‘When Eva told me you were here, I thought at first I would 
' have you thrown out.’ 

‘I would have come back,’ he said. ‘I had to see you -not, that 
I mistrusted Samuel, but just to prove it to myself.’ 

‘Drink your rum,’ she said. 

He glanced at her glass. 

‘You don’t think I’d poison you — ’ She stopped and was 
' angry that she had said it. 

Smiling, he still gazed at her glass. Her anger came through 
to her face. She picked up her glass and touched her lips to it. 
‘Liquor makes me sick,’ she said. ‘I never drink it. It poisons 
me.’ She shut her mouth tight and her sharp teeth bit down on 
her lower lip. ¦> 

Adam continued to smile at her. 

Her rage was rising beyond her control. She tossed the rum 
down her throat and coughed, and her eyes watered and' she 
. wiped her rears away with the back of her hand. ‘You don’t trust 
me very much,’ she said. 

‘No, I don’t.’ He raised his glass and drank his rum, then got 
up and filled both glasses. 

, , ‘I will not drink any more,’ she said in panic. 

‘You don’t have to,’ Adam said. ‘I’ll just finish this and go 
along.’ 

The biting alcohol burned in her throat and she .felt tlie , 
stirring in her that frightened her. ‘I’m not afraid of you or any- 
one else,’ she said, and she drank off her second glass. 

‘You haven’t any reason to be afraid of me,’ said Adam. .‘You 
can forget me now. But you said you had already.’ He felt 
gloriously warm and safe, better than he had for many years. ‘I 
came up to Sara Hamilton’s funeral,’ he said. ‘That was a fine 

. 304 



man. I’ll miss him. Do you remember, Cathy, he helped yoxi 
with the twins?’ 

In Kate the liquor raged. She fought, and the strain of tlw 
fight showed on her face. 

‘What’s the.matterP’ Adam asked. 

, 'I told you it poisoned me. I told you it made me sick.’ 

‘I couldn’t take the chance,’, he calmly said. ‘You sliot me 
once. I don’t know what else you’ve done.’ 

“What do you mean?’ 

‘I’ve' heard some scandal,’ he said. ‘Just dirtj' scandal. 

For the moment she had forgotten her will-fight against the 
cruising alcohol, and now she had lost the battle. Tne recness 
was up in her brain and her fear was gone and in its 
cruelty without caution. She snatched the bottle ana tiLea ner 
glass. , . 

Adam had to get up to pour his own. A feehnr 
foreign to'him had arisen. He was enjojang whir re sw- m ner. 
He liked to see her struggling. He felt good abtn: rcmsxmg nsr. 
but he was also watchful. ‘Now I must be carefni.' re aric can- 
self. ‘Don’t talk, don’t talk.’ 

' He said aloud, ‘Sam Hamilton had been a gacc frame ~ me 
all the years. I’ll miss him.’ 

She had spilled some rum, and it moistened ±e comers of .her 
mouth. ‘I hated hirh,’ she said, ‘I would arre kiiled hun if I 
could.’ 

‘Why? He was kind to us.’ 

‘He looked - he looked into me.’ 

¦ ‘Why not? He looked into me too, and he helped me.’ 

‘I hate him,’ she said. ‘I’m glad he’s dead.' 

'Might have been good if I had looked into you,' Adam 
said. 

Her lips curled; ‘Ifou are a fool,’ she said. 'I don’t Jiatc you. 
You’re just a weak fool.’ 

As her tension built up, a warm calm settled otj Ad/ini, 

‘Sit there and grin,’ she cried. 'You thinic ymi'n- free, doii'i 
you? A few drinks and you think you’re a man! I could crook 
my little finger and you’d come back .slobbering, crmvliiii; on 
your knees.’ Her sense of power u'as loo.se and her I’i.ven Ciiielnk 
ness abandoned. ‘I know you,’ she said. 'I know vour t\nViU'\l!v 
heart.’ 

Adam went on smiling. He tasted his drink, nml tliiil iemmv!v\! 

, her to pour another for herself. The bottle na k ch uu-vn* 
against her glass. 


305 


‘When I \vas htirf I needed j-ou,’ she said. 'But you were ^oj3. 
nd when. I didn’t need you aiiy more you tried to stop me. 
’ake that ugly smirk: off your face.’ - ' 

‘I wonder what it is you hate so much.' ' _ 

‘You wonder, do you.>’ Her caution was almost entirely gone. 

:t isn’t hatred, it’s contempt. When I was a little girl I knew 
'hat stupid lying fools they were- my own mother and father 
retending goodness. And they tveren’t good. I knew them. I, 
ould ’make them do whatever I wanted. I could always make 
leople do what I wanted. When I was Italf-grown I made a rnan 
ill himself. He pretended to be good too, and all he wanted tvas 
3 go to bed with me - a little girl.' 

‘But 3’ou say he killed himself. He must have bren very sorry 
bout something.’ 

‘He was a fool,’ said Kate. ‘I heard him come to the door and 
icg. I laughed all night.’ 

Adam said, ‘I wouldn’t like to tliink I’d driven anj'body out 
>f the world.’ 

‘You’re a fool too. I remember how they talked. “Isn’t she a 
>retty little tiling, so sweet, so dainty?” And no one knew me. I 
aadc them jump through hoops and they never knew if.’ 

Adam drained his glass. He felt remote and inspeotive. He 
bought he could see her impulses crawling like ants and could ¦ 
¦ead them. The sense of deep imdcrstanding that alcohol some- 
imes gives was on him. He said, ‘It doesn’t matter whether you 
iked Sam Hamilton. I found him wise, I remember he said one ' 
ime that a woman who knows all about men usually knows one 
part very well and can’t conceive the other parts, but that doesn’t . 
nean they weren’t there.’ ' 

‘He was a liar and a hypocrite too.’ Kate spat out her words. 
That’s what I hate, the liars, and they’re all liars. Tliat’s what it 
s. 1 love to show them up. I love to rub their noses in their own - 
lastiness.’ 

Adam's brows went up, ‘Do 3’ou mean that in the whole 
vorld there’s only evil and folly?’ 

‘That’s e.vactly what I mean.’ 

‘I don’t believe it,’ Adam said quietly. 

‘You don’t believe it! You don’t believe it!’ She mimicked 
him. ‘Would you like me-to prove it?’ 

‘You can’t,’ he said. 

She jumped up and ran to her desk, and brought the brown 
envelopes to the table. ‘Take a look at these,’ she said. 

, ‘I don’t want to.’ 


anc 



‘I’ll show you anyway.’ She took out a photograph. ‘Look 
there. That’s a state senator. He thinks he’s going to run for 
Congress. Look at, his fat stomach. He’s got bubs like a woman. 
He likes whips. That streak there -that’s a whip mark. Look at 
the expression on his face! He’s got a wife and four kids and 
he’s going to run for Congress, You don’t believe! Look at 
this ! This piece of white blubber is a council-man; this big red 
Swede has a ranch out near Blanco. Look here! Tliis is a pro- 
fessor at Berkeley. Comes all the' way down here to have the 
toilet splashed in his face— professor of philosophy. And look at 
this! This is a minister of the Gospel, a little brother of Jfsus. 
He used to bium a house down to get what he wanted. \Te gn'C 
it to him now another way. See that lighted match under n.:s 
skinny flank?’ 

‘I don’t want to see these,’ said Adam. 

“Well, you have seen them. And you don’t beliere it! I u 
you begging to get in here. I’ll have you screaming at the moon. 
She tried to force her will on him, and she saw that he was ce- 
tached and free. Her rage congealed to poison. ‘No one ^ s". w 
escaped,’ she said softly. Her eyes were flat and ccic run ^ 
fingernails were tearing at the upholstery of the chair, npF— ^ 
and fraying the silk. • . _ ^ 

Adam sighed. ‘If I had those pictures and thoss rren ^ 

I wouldn’t think my life was very safe,’ he said ‘I S'-" ^ 

those pictures could destroy a man’s whole life, .--ren r _• 

danger?’ 

‘Do you think I’m a child?’ she asked 

‘Not any more,’ said Adam. ‘I’m teginnnrg rr r 

twisted human- or no human at all.' _ 

She smiled. ‘Maybe you’ve strreir in me — r — _ 

I want to be human? Look at these memre; _ n mmer re- ^ 

than a human. But I’m nor a erg; - n: nnrrtnr mmim: 
Nobody can hurt me. Don’t werr^— nnr ~ 

the filing cabinets. ‘Ihave a hnrhren nennnti ntrmrsr nt 
and those men know that if — _ — -X shotin happen tt tti- 
ansrthing— one hundred letters, 
be dropped in the mail, and each let 
the most harm. No, they .won’t hurt tt&’ 

Adam asked, ‘But suppose yen had an aahae: 
disease?’ 

‘That wouldn’t make any diuerenns,' the mn 
closer to him. Tm going to tell yen a anm: anna 
knows. In a far years HI be going arsy. Ar:i -rd; 


307 



envelopes will be dropped in the, mail anyway.’ She leaned bad; 
in her chair, laughing. ' ’ 

Adam shivered. He looked closely at her. Her face and .her 
laughter were childlike and innocent. He got up and poured; 
himself another drink, a short drink. The bottle was nearly 
empty. ‘I know what you hate. You hate something in them you 
can’t understand. You don’t hate their evil. You hate the good 
in them you can’t get at. I wonder what you want,, what final , 
thing.’ : ¦ . 

Til have all the money I need,’ she said. T’U go to New York 
and ! won’t be old. I’m not old. I’ll buy a house, a nice house in 
a nice neighbourhood, and I’ll have nice servants. And first I . 
will find a man, if he’s still alive, and very slowly and with the 
greatest attention to pain I will take his life away. If I do it tvell 
and carefully, he will go crazy before he dies.’ 

- Adam stamped on' the floor finpatiently. ‘Nonsense,’ he said. 
‘This isn’t true. This is crazy. None of this is true. I don’t be- 
lieve any of it.’ 

She said, ‘Do yon remember when you first saw me?’ 

His face darkened. ‘Oh, Lord, yes ! ’ 

‘You remember my broken jaw and my split lips and my miss-., , 
ing teeth?’ 

‘I remember. I don’t want to remember.’ 

‘My pleasure will be to find the man who did that,’ she said, 
‘And after that - there will be other pleasures.’ - 

'I have to go,’ Adam said. 

She said, ‘Don’t go, dear. Don’t go now, my love. My sheets . 
are silk. I want you to feel those sheets against your skin.' , 

‘You don’t mean that?’ 

‘Oh, I do, my love, I do. You aren’t clever at love, but I can 
teach you. I wfil teach you.’ She stood up unsteadily and laid 
her hand on his arm. Her face seemed fresh and young. Adam 
looked down at her hand and saw it wTinkled as a pale monkey’s 
paw. He moved away in revulsion. 

She saw his gesture and understood it and her mouth hard- 
ened. 

‘I don’t understand,’ he said. ‘I know, but I can’t believe. I 
know I won’t believe it in the morning. It will be a nightmare 
dream. But no, it -it can’t be a dream -no. Because I remember' 
you are the mother of my boys. You haven’t asked about them. 

. You are tlie mother of my sons.’ ' 

Kate put her elbows on her Imecs and gupped her hands under 
her chin so that her fingers covered her pointed ears. -Her eyes 

308 , . ' . 



were bright with triumph. Her voice was mockingly soft. ‘A fool 
always leaves an opening/ she said. ‘I discovered that when- 1 
was a child. I am the mother of yonr sons. Your sons? I am the 
mother, yes -but how do you know you are .the father?’ • 

Adam’s mouth dropped open. ‘Cathy, who do you mean?’- 

‘My name is Kate,’ she said. ‘Listen, my darling, and remem- 
ber. How many times did I let you come near enough to me to 
have children?’ 

‘You were hurt,’ he said. ‘You were terribly hurt.’ 

‘Once,’ said Kate, ‘just once.’ 

‘The pregnancy made you ill,’ he protested. ‘It was hard on 
you.’ 

She smiled at him sweetly. ‘I wasn’t too hint for your 
brother.’ 

‘My brother?’ 

‘Have you forgotten Charles?’ 

Adam laughed. ‘You are a devil,’ he said. ‘But do you think I 
could believe that of my brother?’ 

‘I don’t care what you believe,’ she said. 

Adam said, ‘I don’t believe it.’ 

‘You will. At first you will wonder, and then you’ll be unsure. 
You’ll think back about Charles -aU about him, I could have 
loved Charles. He was like me in a way.’ 

‘He was not.’ 

‘You’ll remember/ she said. ‘Maybe one day you will remem- 
ber some tea that tasted bitter. You took my medicine by mis- 
take - remember? Slept as you had never slept before and awak- 
ened late -thick-headed?’ 

‘You were too hurt to plan a thing like that.’ 

' ‘I can do an3^ing/ she said. ‘And now, my love, take off 
your clothes. And I will show you what else I can do.’ 

Adam closed his eyes and his head reeled with the rum. He 
opened his eyes and shook his head violently. ‘It wouldn’t mat- 
ter-even if it were true/ he said. ‘It wouldn’t matter at all.’ 
And suddenly he laughed because he knew that this was so. He 
stood too quickly and had to grab the.back of his chair to steady 
himself against dizziness. 

Kate leaped up and put both of her hands on his elbow. ‘Let 
me help you take off your coat/ 

, Adam twisted her hands from his arm as though they were 
wire. He moved unsteadily towards the door. 

Uncontrolled hatred shone in. Kate’s eyes. She screamed, a 
long and shrill animal screech. Adam stopped and turned to- 

309 



w^rds, her. The door banged opra. The house pimp took three, 
steps, poised, pivoted with his whole weight, and his, fist s^ck 
Adam imder the ear. Adam crashed to.the floor. 

Kate screamed, ‘The boots ! Give him, the boots ! ’ 

¦ Ralph moved closer in the fallen.- man and measured the dis- ; 
tance. He noticed Adam’s open, eyes staring up at him. He 
- turned nervously to Kate. 

Her voice was cold. ‘I said give him the boots. Break his face ! ’ - 
Ralph said, ‘He ain’t fighting back. The fight’s all out of him.’ - 
Kate rat down. She breathed through her mouth. Her hands 
writhed on her lap. ‘Adam,’ she said, T hate you. I hate you now 
for the first time. I hate you ! Adam, are you listening? I hate 
yoiii’ - - 

Adam tried to sit up, fell back, and tried again. Sitting on the . 
floor, he, looked up at Kate. ‘It doesn’t matter,’ he said. ‘It 
doesn’t matter at all.’ 

. He got to his knees and rested with his knuckles against the. 
floor. He said, ‘Do you know, I loved you better than anything: 
in the world? I did. It was so strong that it took quite a killing.’ ’ 

. ‘You’ll come crawling back,’ she said. ‘You’ll drag your belly ¦ 

' on the floor - begging, begging ! ’ 

‘You want the boots now, Miss Kate?’ Ralph asked. 

•' She did not answer. 

Adam moved very slowly towards the door, balancing his 
steps carefully. His hand fumbled at the door-jamb. 

Kate called, ‘Adam ! ’ 

He turned slowly. He smiled at her as a man might smile at a 
memory. Then he went out and closed the door gently behind 
; him. 

Kate sat staring at the door. Her eyes were desolate. 


CHAPTER 26 

I 

On TirE train back to King City from his trip to Salinas,'. 

. Adam Trask was in a cloud of vague forms and sounds and 
colours. He was not conscious of any thought at all. 

I believe there are techniques of the human mind wherebjr, in , 
its dark deep, problems are examined, rejected, or accepted. Such • 
. activities sometimes concern facets a man does not know he has. 

310 



f3- c 




How often one goes to 
knowing what causes tb 
new direction and a clea 
black reasoning. And again trsrs 
bubbles in the bloo<L and the str 
electric with joy, and nothing in t 
it. 

Samuel’s funeral and the talk 
Adam sad and bitter, but they die rrt. Gen ce thn grr 
bing an ecstasy arose. He felt young anc free and nZee 
hungry gaiety. He got off the train in rirnr Chy. and. ia 
going directly to the livery stable m- ciann: in i::in.e un: 
he walked to Will Hamilton’s new garage. 

Will was sitting in his glass-walied -eSee imm Tnuer. : 
watch the activity of his mechanix Tnanrm: ieanrn: me . 
of their \^rk. Will’s stomach wan btgnnnrn -n- ill nn: r 

He was studying an advertiaenisna aer nnnm n'ungn 
and often from Cuba. He theugin ne-rar. enuimimr fieri 
father, but he was not. He din hare xme 'iirlie wern 
Tom, who had gone directly from tin nxEXL at Gm. rh 
He felt that it was more digninsd ne Hant nnir.’ii' an 'inn 
• he intended to do, than in ainnncL an Txn -rn er'i'uuif 

He looked up when Adam canoe inv. nrie aGiae i.rd *. 
hand to one of the big leather ciairt he had 
customers past the size of tie ini: tiir- 
nav. 


m n 





‘Yes,- 1 am. But I thought I tvould come in and talk to. you 
about buying an automobile.’, 

A subtie change came over Will, a kind of. silent alertness. -I 
would have thought 3'ou’d be the last man in the valley to get a , 
car,’ he observed, and watched through half-closed cy^-for 
Adam’s reaction. '¦ 

Adam laughed. ‘1 guess I deserved that,’ he said. ‘Maybe your 
father is responsible for a cliange in me.’ 

¦ .‘How do 5"6 u mean?’ ' , • • 

. ‘I don’t know as I could explain it. Anyway, let’s talk about a 
car.’ '¦ ' . ¦ ¦¦• 

‘I’ll gh'C you the straight dojje on it,’ said Will. ‘The truth of , 
the matter is-I’m having one hell of a time getting enough cars 
, to fill my orders. Why, I’ve got a list of people who want them.’ . 

‘Is that so? Well, maybe I’ll just have to' put my name oh the 
list’ . 

‘I’d be glad to do that, Mr Trask, and — ’ He paused. ‘You’ve 
been so close to the family that -well, if there should be a can-, 
cellatipn I’d be glad to move you up on the list’ . 

‘That’s kind of you,’ said Adam. 

‘How would you like to arrange it?’ 

‘How do you mean?’ . 

‘Well, I can arrange it so j’ou pay only so much a month.’ 

‘Isn’t it more expensive that way?’ 

‘Well, there’s interest and carrying charge. Some people find 
it convenient.’ 

‘I think I’ll pay cash,’ said Adam. ‘There’d be no point in 
putting it off.’ 

Will chuckled. ‘Not many people feel that way,’ he said. 'And ' 
there’s going to come a time when I won’t be able to sell for cash 
without losing money.’ 

‘I’d never thought pf that,’ said Adam. ‘You will put me on 
the list, though?’ 

Will leaned towards him. ‘Mr Trask, I’m going to put you on 
the top of the list. The first car that comes in, you’re going to 
have.’ 

‘Thanlt you.’ 

‘I’ll be glad to do it for you,’ said Will. 

Adam asked, ‘How is your mother holding up?’ 

Will leaned back in his chair and an affectionate smile came 
on . his face. ‘She’s a remarkable woman,’ he said. ‘She’s like a . 
rock. I think back on all the hard times we had, and we had 
plenty of them. My father wasn’t yery practical. He was always 

312 ' 



off in the clouds or buried in a hook. I think my mother held us 
together and kept the Hamiltons out of the poorhouse.’ 

‘She’s a fine woman/ Adam said. 

‘Not only fine. She’s strong. She stands on her two feet. She’s 
a tower of strength. Did you come back to Olive’s house after 
the funeral?’ 

¦ ‘No, I didn’t.’ 

‘Well over a hundred people did. And my mother fried all 
that chicken and saw that everybody had enough.’ 

‘She didn’t!’ 

‘Yes, she did. And when you think - it was her own husband.’ 

‘A remarkable woman,’ Adam repeated Will’s phrase. 

‘She’s practical. She knew they had to be fed and she fed 
them.’ 

‘I guess she’ll be all right, but it must be a great loss to her.’ 

‘She’ll be all right,’ Will said. ‘And she’ll outlive us.all, little 
tiny thing that she is.’ 

On his drive back to the ranch Adam found that he was notic- 
ing things he had not seen for years. He saw the wild flowers in 
the heavy grass, and he saw the red cows against the hillsides, 
moving up the easy ascending paths and eating as they went. 
When he came to his own land Adam felt a quick pleasure so 
sharp that he began to examine it. And suddenly he found him- 
self saying aloud in rhythm with his horse’s trotting feet. ‘I’m 
free, I’m free. I don’t have to worry any more. I’m free. She’s 
gone. She’s gone out of me. Oh, Christ Almighty, I’m free!’ 

He reached out and stripped the fur from the silver-grey sage 
beside the road, and when his fingers were sticky with the sap he 
smelled the sharp pentrating odour on his fingers, breathed it 
deep into his lungs. He was glad to be going home. He wanted 
to see how the twins had grown in the two days he had been 
gone -he wanted to see the twins. ' 

‘I’m free, she’s gone,’ he chanted aloud. 

II 

Lee came out of the house to meet Adam, and he stood at the 
horse’s head while Adam climbed down from the buggy. 

‘How:are the boys?’ Adam asked. 

‘They’re fine. I made them some bows and arrows and they 
went hunting rabbits in the river bottom. I’m not keeping the 
pan hot, though.’ — 

‘Everything all right here?’ 


313 



Lee looked at him sharply,' was about to exclaim, digged liis 
mind. ‘How was the fimcral?’ - . 

•Lots of people,’ Adam said. ‘He liad lots of friends. I can’t 
get it through my head tliat he’s gone.’ 

‘My people bury them with drums and scatter papers to con- 
fuse the devils and put roast pigs instead of flowers on the grave. 
We’re a practical people and always a littie hungry'. But our 
devils. aren’t very' bright. We can out-think them. That’s sorne 
progress.’ ¦ 

. ‘I think Samuel would have liked that kind of funeral,’ said 
Adam. ‘It would Mve interested him.’ He noticed that Lee was 
staring at him. ‘Put the horse away, Lee^ and then come in and 
make some tea. I want to talk to you.’ 

Adam went into the house and took off his black clothes. He 
could smell the sweet arid now sickish odour of rum about liim- 
self.. He removed all of his clothes and sponged his skin with 
yellow soap tmtil tlie odour was gone from his pores. He put on 
:a clean" blue shirt and overalls washed until they were soft and , 
pale blue and lighter blue at the knees where the wear came. He 
. shaved slowly and combed his hair while the rattle of Lee at the 
stove sounded from the kitchen. Then he went to the living- 
room. Lee had set out one cup and a bowl of sugar on the table' 
beside his big chair. Adam looked around at the flowered cur- 
tains washed so long that the blossoms were pale. He saw the 
worn rugs on the floor and the brown path on the linoleum in 
the hall. And it was aU new to him. - ’ 

When Lee came in with the teapxjt Adam said, ‘Bring yourself 
a cup, Lee. And if you’ve got any of that drink of yours, I could 
use a little, I got drunk last night.’ 

Lee said, ‘You drunk? I can hardly beh'eve it.’ 

‘Well, I was. And I want to talk about it I saw you looking at 
me.’ 

‘Did you?’ asked Lee, and he went to the kitchen to bring his 
cup and glasses and his stone bottle of ng-ka-py. 

He said when he came back, ‘The only times I’ve tasted it for 
years has been with you and Mr Hamilton.’ 

‘Is that the same one we named the twins with ?’ 

‘Yes, it is.’ Lee poured the scalding green tea. He grimaced 
when Adam put two spoonfuls of sugar in his cup. 

Adam stirred his tea and watched the sugar crystals whirl and 
disappear into liquid. He said, ‘I went down to see her.’ 

‘I thought you might,’ said Lee. ‘As a matter of fact I don’t 
•see how a human man could have waited so long.’ 

, 314 



‘Maybe I wasn’t a human man/ 

‘I thought of that too. How was she?’ 

Adam said slowly, ‘I can’t understand it. I can’t believe there 
is such a creature in the world.’ 

‘The trouble with you Occidentals is that you don’t have 
devils to explain things with. Did you get drunk after- 
wards?’ 

‘No, before and during. I needed it for courage, I guess.’ 

‘You look aU right now.’ 

‘I am all right,’ said Adam. ‘That’s what I want to talk to 5'ou 
about.’ He paused nnd said ruefully, ‘This time last year I would 
have run to Sam Hamilton to talk.’ 

‘Maybe both of us have got a piece of him,’ said Lee. ‘Maybe' 
that’s what immortality is.’ 

‘I seemed to come out of a sleep,’ said Adam. ‘In some strange 
. %vay my eyes have cleared. A weight is off me.’ 

“You even use words that soimd like Mr Hamilton,’ said Lee. 
‘I’ll build a theory for my immortal relatives.’ 

Adam drank his cup of black liquor and licked his lips. ‘I’m 
free,’ he said. ‘I have to tell it to someone. I can live with my 
boys. I might even see a woman. Do j'ou know what I’m say- 
ing?’ ' 

‘Yes, I know. And I can see it in your eyes and in the way 
• your body stands. A man can’t lie about a thing like that. You’U 
like the boys, I think.’ 

‘Well, at least I’m going to give myself a chance. Will you give 
me another drink and some more tea?’ 

Lee poured the tea and picked up his cup. 

‘I don't know why you don’t scald your mouth, drinking it 
that hot.’ 

Lee was smiling inwardly, Adam, looking at him, realized that 
Lee was not a young man any more. The skin on his cheeks was 
stretched tight, and its surface shone as though it were glazed. 
And there was a red irritated rim around bis eyes. 

Lee studied the shell- thin cup in his hand and his was a 
memory smile. ‘Maybe if you’re free, you can free me.’ 

‘What do you mean, Lee?’ 

‘Could you let me go?’ 

‘Why,'of course you can go. Aren’t 3'ou happy here?’ 

‘I don’t think I’ve ever knovra what you people call happi- 
ness. We think of contentment as the desirable thing, and ma’'^>'* 

that’s negative.’ • . . . 

Adam said, ‘Call it that, then. Aren’t j'ou contented here' 

315 '. - 



¦ Lee said, .‘I don’t think any man. is contpited when tliere are - 
things undone he wishK to do.’ ¦ ¦ . ' . 

‘What do you want to do?.’ . 

: ‘Weil, one thing it’s .too late for. 1 wanted to have a wife and 
»ns of my onm. Maybe I wanted to hand down the nonsense . 
that passes for wisdom in a parent, to force it on my own help- 
less children.’ , . ' . . ¦ 

'You’re not too bid.’ 

‘Oh, I guess I’m physically able to father a child. That’s not 
what I’m thinking. I’m too closely married to a quiet reading- 
lamp. You know, Mr Trask, once I had a wife. I made her up 
just as you did, only mine had no life outside my mind. She was 
good. company in my little room. I would talk and she would, 
hsten, and then she would talk, would tell me all the happen- . 

. ings of a woman’s afternoon. She was very pretty and she made. ' 
coquettish little'jokes. But now I don’t know whether I would 
listen to her. And I wouldn’t want to make her sad or lonely. . 
So there’s my first plan gone.’ 

•What was the other?’ 

‘I talked to Mr Hamilton about that. I want to open a book- 
store in Chinatown in San Francisco. I would live in the back, ¦, 
and my days would be full of discussions and arguments. I-.' 
wotild like to have in stock' some of those dragon-carved blocks . 
of ink from the dynasty of Sung. The boxes are worm-bored, 
and that ink is made from fir smoke and a glue that comes only . 
from wild asses’ skin. When you paint with that ink it may - 
physically be black but it suggests to your eye and persuades ' 
your seeing that it is all the colours in the world. Maybe a 
painter would come by and we could argue about method and 
haggle about price.’ , , 

Adam said, ‘Are you making this up?’ 

‘No. If you are well and if you are free, I would like to have 
my little bookshop at last. I would like to die there.’ 

Adam sat silently for a while, stirring sugar into his lukewarm 
tea. Then he said, ‘Funny. I found myself wishing you were a 
slave so I could refuse you. Of course you can go if you want 
,to. I’ll even lend you money for your bookstore.’ 

‘Oh, I have the money, I’ve had it a long time,’ 

,‘I never thought of your going,’ Adam said. ‘I took you for 
Ranted.’ He straightened his shoulders. ‘Could you wait a little 
- while?’ 

‘What for?’ 

¦ ‘I want you to. help me get acquainted with my boys. I want 
, 316 


to put this place in shape, or m'aybe sell it or rent it. FU want to 
^ow how much money I have left and what I can do with it.’ 

‘You wouldn’t lay a trap for me?’ Lee asked. ‘My wish isn’t 
as strong as it once w'as. I’m afraid I could be talked out of it or, 
what would be worse, I could be held back just by being needed. 
Please try not to need me. That’s the worst bait of all to a 
lonely man.’ 

Adam said, ‘A lonely man. I must have been far_do\\'n in my- 
self not to have thought of that.’ 

‘Mr Hamilton knew,’ said Lee. He raised his head and his fat 
lids let only sparks from his eyes show through. ‘We’re con- 
trolled, we Chinese,’ he said. ‘We show no' emotion; I loved Mr 
Hamilton. I would like to go to Salinas tomorrow if you will 
permit it.’ 

'Do anything you want,’ said Adam. ‘God knows you’ve done 
enough for me.’ 

‘I want to scatter devil papers,’ Lee said. ‘I want to put a little 
roast pig on the grave of my father.’ 

Adam got up quickly and knocked over his cup and went out- 
side and left Lee sitting there. 


CHAPTER 27 

I 

That year the rains had come so gently that the Salinas 
River did not overflow. A slender stream twisted back and forth 
in its broad bed of grey sand, and the water was not milky with 
silt but clear and pleasant. The willows that grow in the river- 
bed were well leafed, and the wild blackberry vines were thrust- 
ing their spiky new shoots along the ground. 

It was" very warm for March, and the kite wind blew steadily 
from the south and turned up the silver undersides of the leaves. 

Against the perfect cover of vine and bramble and tangled drift 
sticks, a little grey brush rabbit sat quietly in the stm, drj’ing his 
breast fur, wetted by the grass dew of his ^rly feeding. The 
rabbit’s nose crinkled, and his ears slewed around now and then, 
investigating small sounds that might possibly be charged with 
danger to a brush rabbit. There had been a rhythmic vibration 
.in the ground audible through the paws, so that ears swung ar-^ 
nose wrinkled, but that had stopped. Then there had beer' 

317 



movement of willow branches nVenty-five yards away and down- . 
wind, so that no odour of fear came to the rabbit. ' , : 

JFor the last two minutes, there had been sounds. of inter^t 
but not of dangw-a snap and then a'whisde like that of the 
wnngs of a wild dos'e. The rabbit stretched out one hind leg 
lazily in the warm sun. There was a snap and a tvhistle.and a 
grunting thud on fur. The rabbit sat perfectly still and his eyes 
grew large. A bamboo arrow was through his chest, and its iron 
tip deep in the ground on the other side. The rabbit slumped 
over on his side and his feet ran and scampered in the air for a 
moment before he was still. . 

.• Trom the willow tw'o crouching hoys crept. They carried 
foufrfoot bows, and tufts of arrows stuck their feathers up front 
the quivers behind their left shoulders. They were dressed, in 
overalls and faded blue shirts, but each boy wore one perfect 
turkey tail-feather tied with tape against his temple. 

The bo3's moved cautiously, bending low, self-consciously 
toeing-in like Indians. The rabbit’s flutter of death was finished 
When they bent over to examine their victim. 

¦ ‘Right through the heart,’ said Cal as though it could not be 
any other way..Aron looked down and said nothing. ‘I’m going ¦ 
to say you did it,’ Cal went on. ‘I won’t take credit. And I’ll say 
it was a hard shot.’ 

‘Well, it was,’ said Aron. 

‘Well, I’m telling y-ou. I’ll give you credit to Lee and to 
Father.’ 

> * 

¦ ‘I don’t know as I want credit -not all of it,’ said Aron. ‘Tell 
3'ou what. If we get another one we’ll say we each hit one, and 
if we don’t get any more, why don’t we say we both 'shot to- 
gether and we don’t know who hit?’ 

¦ ‘Don’t you want credit?’ Cal asked subtly. 

‘Well, not full credit. We could divide it up.’ ; 

.‘After all, it was my arrow,’ said Cal. 

• ^ ‘No, it wasn’t.’ 

‘You look at the feathers. See that nick? That’s mine.’ 

‘How did it get in my quiver? I don’t remember any nick.’ 

‘Maybe you don’t remember. But I’m going to give you credit 
anytvay.’ 

Aron said gratefully, ‘No, Cal. I don’t want tliat. We’U say we 
both shot at once,’ 

‘Well, if that’s what you want. But suppose Lee sees if was 
my arrow?’ - ¦ • 

‘We’ll just say it was in my quiver.’ 

. ' ¦ 318 ¦ ¦ ! 



‘You think he’ll believe that? He’ll think' you’re lying.’ 

Aron said helplessly, ‘If he thinks you shot it, why, well just" 
let him think that.’ 

‘I just wanted you to know/ said Cal. ‘Just in case he’d think 
that.’ He drew the arrow through the rabbit so that the white 
¦ feathers were dark red with heart blood. He put the arrow in his 
quiver. ‘You can carry him/ he said magnanimously. ' 

.‘We ought to start back/ said Aron. ‘Maybe Father’s back by 
now.’ 

Cal said, ‘We could cook that old rabbit and have him for our 
supper and stay out all night.’ 

‘ICs too cold at night. Cal. Don’t you remember how you 
shivered this morning?’ 

‘It’s not too cold for me,’ said Cal. ‘I never feel cold.’ 

‘You did this morning.’ 

‘No, I didn’t. I was just making fun of you, shivering and 
chattering like a milk baby. Do you want to call me a liar?’ 

‘No,’ said Aron. ‘I don’t want to fight.’ 

‘Afraid to fight?’ 

‘No. I just don’t want to.’ 

‘If I was to say you were scared, would you want to call me a 
liar?’: 

,‘No.’ 

‘Then you’re scared, aren’t you?’ 

‘I guess so.’ 

. Aron wandered slowly away, leaving the rabbit on the ground. 
His eyes were very wide and he had a beautiful soft mouth. The 
width between his blue eyes gave him an expression of angelic 
innocence. His hair was fine and golden. The sun seemed to 
light up the top of his head. 

He was puzzled - but he was often puzzled. He knew his 
brother was getting at something, but he didn’t know what. Cal • 
was an enigma to him. He could not follow the r^soning of his 
brother, and he was always surprised at the tangents it took. 

Cal looked more like Adam. His hair was dark brown. He was 
bigger than his brother, bigger of bone, heavier in the shoulder, 
and his jaw had the square sterimess of Adam’s jaw. Cal’s eyes 
were brown and watchful, and sometimes they sparkled as 
though they were black. But Cal’s hands were very small for the 
^ size of the rest of him. The fingers-were short and slender, the 
nails delicate. Cal protected his hands. There were few things 
that could make him cry, but a cut finger was one of them. He 
never ventured with his hands, never touched- an in*" or 

319 



carried a snake about. And in a fight he picked up a rods or a 
stick to fight with'. - . 

, As Cal watched his brother walking away from him there was, 
a small sure smile on Ids lips. He called, ‘Aron, wait for me P 
When he caught up with, his, brother he held out the rabbit. 
'You can carry, it,’ he said kindly, putting his arm around his 
bfotlier’s shoulders. ‘Don’t be mad at me.’ 

?You always want to fight,’ said Aron. 

‘No, I don’t I was only making a joke.’ ' 

¦ ‘Were you?’ ¦ 

‘Sure. Look -you can carry the rabbit. And we’ll' start back 
now if you want’ 

Aron smiled at last He was always relieved when his brother , 
let the tension go. The uvo boys trudged up out of the river 
bottom and up the crumbling cliflt to the level land. Aron’s right 
trouser leg was well bloodied from the rabbit 
¦Cal said, ^They’ll be surprised we got a rabbit If Fathdr’s 
home, let’s give it to him. He likes a rabbit for his supper.’ 

‘All right,’ Aron said happily. ‘Tell you what We’ll both give 
it to him and we won't say which one hit it.’ 

‘All right, if you want to,’ said Cal. ‘ ¦ 

They walked along in silence for a time and then Cal said, 
‘All this is our land- way to hell over the river.’ ‘ ' 

‘It’s Father’s.’ 

‘Yes, but when he dies it’s going to be ours.’ 

This was a new thought to Aron. ‘What do you mean, when 
he dies?’ v. • 

‘Ever>hody dies,’ said Cal, ‘Like Mr Hamilton. He died.’ •. 

‘Oh, yes,’ Aron said. ‘Yes, he died.’ He couldn’t connect the 
two - the dead Mr Hamilton and the live father. 

'They put them in a box and then they dig a hole and put the 
box in,’ said Cal. 

‘I know that.’ Aron wanted to change the subject, to think of 
something else. 

Cal said, ‘I know a secret,’ 

‘What is it.’ * 

‘You’d tell.’ 

. ‘No, I wouldn’t, if you said not.’ 

‘I don’t know if I ought.’ 

‘Tell me,’ Aron begged. 

‘You won’t teU?’ 

' ‘No, I won’t.’ 

Cal said, ‘Where do you think our mother is?’ 

‘320 



I 


‘She’s dead.’ 

‘No, she isn’t.’ 

‘She is too.’ 

. ‘She ran away,’ said Cal. ‘I heard some men talking.’ 

‘They are liars.’ 

‘She ran away,’ said Cal. ‘You won’t tell I told you?’ ' 

‘I don’t believe it,’ said Aron. ‘Father said she was in Heaven.’ 

Cal said quietly, ‘Pretty soon I’m going to run away and find 
her. I’ll bring her back.’ 

‘Where did the men say she is?’ 

‘I don’t know, but I’ll find her.’ 

‘She’s in Heaven,’ said Aron. ‘Why would Father tell a lie?’ 
He looked at his brother, begging him silently to agree. Cal 
didn’t answer him. ‘Don’t you think she’s in Heaven with the 
angels?’ Aron insisted. And when Cal still did not answer, ‘^^ho 
¦ were the men who said it?’ 

‘Just some men. In the post office at King City. They didn’t 
think I-could hear. But I got good ears. Lee says I can hear the 
grass grow.’ 

Aron said, ‘What would she want to run away for?’ 

‘How do I know. Maybe she didn’t like us.’ 

Aron inspected this heresy. ‘No,’ he said. ‘The men were liars. 
Father said she’s in Heaven. And you know how he don’t like to 
talk about her.’ 

¦ ‘Maybe that’s because she ran away.’ 

‘No. I asked Lee. Know w'hat Lee said? Lee said, “Your 
mother loved you and she still does.” And Lee gave me a star to 
look at. He said maybe that was our mother and she would love 
us as long as that light was there. Do you think Lee is a liar?’ 
Through his gathering tears Aron could see his brother’s eyes, 
hard and reasonable. There were no tears in Cal’s eyes. 

Cal felt plrasantly excited. He had found another implement, 
another secret tool, to. use for any purpose he needed. He 
studied Aron, saw his quivering lips, but he noticed in time the 
flaring nostrils. Aron would cry, but sometimes, pushed to tears, 
Aron would fight too. And when Aron cried and fought at the 
same time he was dangerous. Nothing could hurt him and noth- 
ing could stop him. Once Lee had held him in his lap, clasping 
his stiU flailing fists to his sides, imtil after a long time he re- 
laxed. And his nostrils had flared then. 

Cal put his new tool away. He could bring it out any time, 
and he knew it was the sharpest weapon he had found. , He "~"’ld 
inspect'if at his ease and judge when and how to use it ' 

' ' . 321 



' . He made his decision almost too late. Aron leaped at him'and , , 
the limp' body of the rabbit slashed against his face. Cal jumped, 
back and cried, ‘I was just joking.. Honest, .Aron, it was only a . 
joke.’ ' ' ; . , ' 

Aron stopped. Pain and puzalement were on his face. ‘I don’t 
like that joke,’ he said, and he snifBed and wiped his nose on his 
slee\'e.' ' \ • ¦' 

Cal came close to him and hugged him and kissed Itim on the 
cheek. ‘I won’t do it any more,’ he said. 

The boys trudged along silently for a while. The light of day 
began to withdraw. Cal looked over his shoulder at the thunder- 
head sailing blackly over the mountains on the nen^ous March 
wdnd. ‘Going to storm,’ he said. ‘Going to be a bastard.’ 

Aron said, ‘Did you really hear those men?’ 

.• ‘Maybe I only, thought I did,’ Cal said quickl5'. ‘Jesus, look at . 
that cloud!’ 

. . Aron turned round to look at the black monster. It. ballooned, 
in great dark rolls above, and beneath it drew a long trailing skirt - 
of rain, and as they looked the cloud rumbled and flashed _fira 
Borne on the wind, the cloud-burst drummed hollowly on the 
‘ fat wet hills across the valley and moved out over the flat lands. 
The boys turned and ran for home, and the cloud boomed at' 
their backs and the lighming shattered the air into qualmg 
pieces. The cloud caught up with them, and the first stout drops 
plopped on the ground out of the riven skj'. They could smell 
the sweet odour of ozone. Running, they sniffed the thunder 
smell. 

, As they ran across the coimtry road and on to the wheel tracks 
that led to their own home draw the water struck them. The 
rain fell in sheets and in columns. Instantly they were soaked 
through, and their hair plastered down on their foreheads and 
streamed into their eyes, and the turkey feathers at their temples 
bent over with the weight of water. 

Now that they were as wet as they could get the boys stopped 
running. There was no reason to run for cover. The}' looked at. 

, each other and laughed for joy. Aron wrung out the rabbit and 
tossed it in the air and caught it and threw it to Cal. And Cal, 
feeling silly, put it around his neck with the head and hind feet . 
under his chin. Both boys leaned over and laughed hysterically. 
The rain roared on the oak trees in the home draw and the wind ' 
disturbed their high dignity. 


322 


' II 

The twins came in sight of the ranch buildings in time to see 
Lee,^ his head through the centre hole of a yellow oilskin poncho, 
leading a strange horse and a flimsy rubber-tjTed bugg^’’ to- 
wards the shed. ‘Somebody’s here/ said Cal. ‘Will you look at 
that rig?’ 

They began to run again, for there was a certain deliciousness 
about visitors. Near the steps they slowed down, moved cau- 
tiously round the house, for- there was a certain fearsomeness 
about visitors too. They went in the back way and stood drip- 
ping.in the kitchen. 

They heard voices in the living-room — their father’s voice 
and another, a man’s voice. And then a third voice stiffened their 
stomachs and rippled a little chill up their spines. It was a 
woman’s voice. Those boys had had very little experience with 
women. They tiptoed into their own room and stood looking at 
each other. 

'Who do you s’pose it is?’ Cal said. 

^ An emotion like a light had burst in Aron. He wanted to 
shout, ‘Maybe it’s our mother. Maybe she’s come back.’ And 
then he remembered that she was in Heaven and people do not 
come back from there. He said, ‘I don’t know. I’m going to put 
on dry clothes.’ 

The boys put on clean dry clothes, which were exact replicas 
of the sopping clothes they were taking off. They took off the 
wet turkey feathers and combed their hair back with their fin- 
gers. And all the while they could hear the voices, mostly low- 
pitched, and then- the high woman’s voice, and once they froze, 
listening, for they heard a child’s voice - a girl’s voice - and this 
was such an excitement that they did not even speak of hearing it. 

Sffendy they edged into the hall and crept towards the door 
to the living-room. Cal turned the door-knob very, very slowly 
and lifted it up so that no creak would betray them. 

Only the smallest crack was open when Lee came in by the, 
back door,.shufiled along the hall, getting out of his poncho, and 
caught them there. ‘Lilly boy peek?’ he said in pidgin, and when 
Cal closed the door and the latch clicked Lee said quickly, ‘Your 
father’s home. You’d better go in.’ 

¦ Aron whispered hoarsely, ‘Who else is there?’ 

‘Just some people going by. The rain drove them in.’ Lee put 
his hand over Cal’s on the door-knob and turned it and opened 
the door. 


323 



‘Boys come along home,’ he said arid left them there, exposed 
' in the opening. • ¦ ¦ ' ’ ‘ ¦ 

Adam cried, ‘Come in, boys ! .Corne on in ! ’ 

The two carried .their heads low and darted glances at the , 
strangers and shufHed their feet. There was a man in city' clothes 
and a woman in the fanciest .clodies ever. Her dust-coat and a, 
hat and veil lay"on a chair beside her, and she seemed to the boys 
to be clad entirely in black silk and lace. Black lace even climbed 
up little sticks and hugged her throat. That was enough for one 
day, but it wasn't all. Beside the woman sat a girl, a little y'ounger 
maybe tlian the twins, but not much. She wore a blue-checked 
stinbonnet with lace around the front. Her dress was flowe^, 
and a little apron with pockets was tied around her middle. Her 
sldrt wgs turned back, showing a petticoat of red knitted yam 
with tatting around the edge. The boys could not see her face 
because of the sunbonnet, but her hands were folded in her lap, 
and it was easy to see the little gold seal ring she wore on her 
third finger. 

Neither boy had drawn a breath and the red rings were begin- 
L ,ning to flare at the back of their eyes from holding their breath. 

‘These are my boys,’ their father said. ‘Thej'’re twins. That’s 
Aron and tliis is Caleb. Boys, shake hands with our guests.’ 

The boys moved fonrard, heads down, hands up, in a gesture 
very like surrender and despair.- Their limp fists were pumped 
by the gentleman and then by tlic lacy lady. Aron was first, and 
he turned away from the little girl, but the lad}’ said, 'Aren’t you 
going to say how do to my daughter?’ 

Aron shuddered and surrendered his hand in the direction of 
S.the girl with the hidden face. Nothing happened. His lifeless 
.> were not gripped, or wrung, or squeezed, or racheted. 
His hand simply hung on the air in front of her. Aron pecked 
up through his eyelashes to see what was going on. 

Her head was down too, and she had the advantage of tlie- 
- sunbonnet. Her small right hand with the signet ring on the 
middle finger was stuck out too, but it made no move towards 
Aron’s hand. 

He stole a glance at the lady. She was smiling, her lips parted. • 

. The room seemed crushed with silence. And then Aron heard.a 
ripping snicker from Cal. 

Aron reached out and grabbed her hand and pumped it up 
and down three times. It was as soft as a handful of pearls. He 
felt a pleasure that burned him. He dropped her hand and con- 
cealed his in his overall pocket. As he backed hastily away he saw’ 

324 


Cal step up and shake hands formally and say, ‘How do.’ Aron 
had forgotten to say it, so he said it now after his brother, and it 
sounded strange. Adam and his guests laughed. 

Adam said, ‘Mr and Mrs Bacon nearly got caught in the rain.’ 

‘We were lucky to be lost here,’ Mr Bacon said. ‘I was looking 
for the Long ranch.’ 

‘That’s farther. You should have taken the next left turn off 
the country road to the south.’ Adam continued to the boys ‘Mr 
Bacon is a county supervisor.’ 

‘I don’t know why, but I take the job very seriously,’ said Air 
Bacon, and he too addressed the boys. ‘My daughter’s name is 
Abra, boys. Isn’t that a funny name?’ He used the tone adults 
employ with children. He turned to Adam and said in poetic 
sing-song, ‘ “Abra was ready ere I called her name; And though 
I called ¦ another, Abra came.’’ Matthew Prior. I won’t say I 
hadn’t wanted a son - but Abra’s such a comfort. Look up, dear.’ 

Abra did not move. Her hands were again clasped in her lap. 
Her father repeated with relish, ‘ “And though I called another, 
Abra came.’’ ’ 

Aron saw his brother looking at the little sunbonnet without 
an oimce of fear. And Aron said hoarsely, ‘I don’t think Abra’s 
a funny name.’ 

‘He didn’t mean funny that way,’ Mrs Bacon explained. ‘He 
only meant curious.’ And she explained to Adam, ‘My husband 
gets the strangest things out of books. Dear, shouldn’t we be 
going?’ 

Adam said eagerly, ‘Oh, don’t go yet, ma’am. Lee is making 
some tea. It will warm you up.’ 

‘Well, how pleasant!’ Mrs Bacon said, and she continued, 
‘Children, it isn’t raining any more. Go outside and play.’ Her 
voice had such authority that they filed out — Aron first and Cal 
second and Abra following. 


Ill 

In the living-room Mr Bacon crossed his legs. ‘You have a fine 
prospect here,’ he said. ‘Is it a sizeable piece?’ 

Adam said, ‘I have a good strip. I cross the river to the other 
side. It’s a good piece.’ 

‘That’s all yours across the county road then?’ 

‘Yes, it is. I’m kind of ashamed to admit it. I’ve let it go 
badly. I haven’t fanned it at all. Maybe I got too much farming 
asachild.’- 

325 



Both 2vlr and Mrs Bacon were looking at Adam now, and he 
knew he had to make some explanation for letting his good land 
Tun free. He' said, ‘I guess I’m a lazy man. And my father didn’t ,, 
help me when he left me enough to get along on \yithouf work- , 
ing.’ He dropped his eyes but he could feel the relief on the part • 
of the Bacons. It was not laziness if he was a rich man. Only the 
poor were lazy. Just as only the poor were ignorant. A rich man 
who didn’t know anything was spoiled dr independent. • ¦ 

, ‘Who takes care of the boys?’ Mrs Bacon asked. 

'Adam laughed. 'What taking care of tltey get,’ and it isn’t 
much, is Lee’s work.’ ' , - . 

‘Lee?’ • : , ¦ ¦ 

Adam became a little irritated with the questioning. ‘I only 

• have one man,’ he said shortly. 

. ‘You mean the Chinese we saw?’ Mrs Bacon was shocked. 

Adam smil^ at her. She had frightened him at first, but now . 

' he’ was more comfortable. ‘Lee raised the boys, and he has taken 
care of me,’ he said. - ' - 

‘But didn’t they e\’er have a woman’s care?’. 

‘No, they didn’t.’ 

‘The poor lambs,’ she said. . > 

‘They’re wild but I guess they’re healthy,’ Adam said. ‘I guess 
. we’ve all gone wild like the land. But now Lee is going away. I 
don’t know what we’ll do.’ 

Mr Bacon carefully cleared the phlegm from lu's throat so it 
wouldn’t be run over by his pronouncement. ‘Have you thought 
about the education of your sons?’ ' • 

‘No - 1 guess I haven’t thought about it much.’ 

• Mrs Bacon said, ‘My husband is a believer in education.’ > 

‘Education is the key to the future,’ Mr Bacon said. 

, ‘What Idnd of education?’ asked Adam. 

Mr Bacon went on, ‘All things come to men who know. Yes^ 
I’m a believer in the torch of learning.’ He leaned close and his 
voice became confidential. ‘So long as you aren’t going to farm 
yoiu: land, why don't you rent it and move to the county seat- 
near our good public schools?’ 

For just a second Adam thought of saying, ‘Why don’t you 
mind your oum goddam business?’ but instead he asked, ‘You 
think that would be a good idea ?’ 

; T think I could get you a good reliable tenant,’ Mr Bacon 
said. ‘No rmson why you shouldn’t have something coming in 
from your land if you don’t live on it.’ 

Lre made a great stir coming in with the . tea. He had heard 
. . 326 



enough of the tones through the door to be sure Adam was find- 
ing them tiresome. Lee was pretty certain they didn’t like tea,- 
and if they did, they weren’t likely to favour the kind he had 
brewed. And when they drank it with compliments he knew that 
the Bacons had their teeth in something. Lee tried to catch 
Adam’s eye but could not. Adam was studying the rug between 
his feet. 

Mrs Bacon was saying, “My husband has served on his school 
board for many years — ’ but Adam didn’t hear the discussion 
that followed. 

He was thinking of a big globe of the world, suspended and 
swaying from a limb of one of his oak trees. And for no reason 
at all that he could make out, his mind leaped to his father, 
stumping about on his wooden leg, rapping on his leg for atten- 
tion with a'Walking-stick. Adam could see the stem and mili- 
tary face of his father as he forced his sons through drill and 
made them carry heavy packs to develop their shoulders. 
Through his memory Mrs Bacon’s voice droned on. Adam felt 
the pack loaded with rocks. He saw Charles’s face grinning sar- 
donically -Charles -the mean, fierce eyes, the hot temper. Sud- 
denly Adam wanted to see^Charles. He would take a trip-take_ 
the boys. He slapped his leg with excitement. 

Mr Bacon paused in his talk. ‘I beg your pardon?’ 

‘Oh, I’m sorry,’ Adam said. ‘I just remembered something I’ve 
neglected to do.’ Both Bacons were patiently, politely waiting for 
his explanation. Adam thought, ‘Why not? I’m not ruxming for 
supervisor. I’m not on the school board. Why not?’ He said to 
his guests, ‘I just remembered that I have forgotten to write to 
my brother for over ten years.’ They shuddered under his state- 
ment and exchanged glances. 

Lee had been refilling the tea-cups. Adam saw his cheeks puff 
out and heard his happy snort as he passed to the safety of the 
hallway. The Bacons didn’t want to comment on the incident. 
They wanted to be alone to discuss it. 

Lee anticipated that it would be this way. He hurried out 
to harness up and bring the rubber-tyred buggy to the front 
door. 


IV 


When Abra and Cal and Aron -went out, they stood side by side 
on the small covered porch, looking at the rain splashing and 
dripping down from the wide-spreading oak trees, ^fie^cloud- 

327 



.burst had passed into a distant echoing thunder roll, but it had 
left a rain determined to go on' for a long time. . = 

•'-v., Aron said, .‘That lady told 'us the rain was' stopped.’’ ; . 

Abra answered" him wisely, 'She didn’t look. When she’s taik- 
'ing she never looks.’ , ' , ' ¦ ‘ . 

. Gal demanded, ‘How old are you?’ 

‘Ten, going on eleven,’ said Abra. 

‘Ho ! ’ said Cal. ‘We’re elet'en, going on twelve.’ - 

¦- Abra pushed her 'sunbonriet back. It framed her head like a 
halo. She was pretty, with dark hair in two braids. Her little , 
- forehead was -round and domed, and her brows were level. One •, 
day' her nose would be sweet and turned up where now it was 
still button-form. But tu'O features would be with her ^ways. 

, Her chin was -firm and her mouth was as sweet as a flower, and 
very wide and pink. Her hazel eyes were sharp and intelligent, 
and completely fearless. She looked straight into the faces of the 
' boys, straight into their eyes, one after the other, and there was 
no hint of the shyness she had pretended inside the house. 

‘I don’t believe you’re twins,’ she said. ‘You^don’t look alike.’ 

‘We are too,’ said Cal. 

; . 'We are too,’ said Aron. 

. ‘Some tu'ins don’t look alike,’ Cal insisted. 

‘Lots of them don’t,’ Aron said. ‘Lee told us how it is. If the 
lady has one egg, the twins look alike. If she has ttvo eggs, they ¦ 
don’t.’ 

¦ ‘We’re two eggs,’ said Cal. 

Abra smiled with amusement at the myths of these countri' 

"'h boys. ‘Eggs,’ she said. ‘Ho ! Eggs.’ She didn’t say it loudly or 
’harshly, but Lee’s tlieory tottered and swayed and then she 
brought it crashing down. ‘Which one of you is fried?’ she 
•asked. ‘And which one is poached?’ 

The boys exchanged uneasy glances. It was their first experi- 
- ence with the inexorable logic of women, which is ovcrwhelrnihg 
¦ even, or perhaps especially, when it is wrong. This was new to 
them, exciting and frightening. 

Cal said, ‘Lee is a Chinaman.’ 

‘Oh, well,’ said Abra kindly, ‘why don’t you say so? Maybe 
you’re china eggs, then, like they put in a nest.’ She paused to 
let her shaft sink in. She saw opposition, struggle, disappear. 
Abra had taken control. She was the boss. 

Aron suggpted, “Let’s go to the old house and play there. It 
leaks a h'ttie but it’s nice.’ 

They ran under the dripping oaks to the old Sanchez house 



and plunged in through its open door, which squeaked restlessly ^ 
on rusty hinges. 

The ’dobe house had entered its. second decay. The great sala. 
all along the front was half plastered, the line of white half wa^' ' 
round and then stopping, just as the workmen had left it over 
ten years before. And the deep windows with their rebuilt 
sashes remained glassless. The hew floor was streaked with water 
stain, and a clutter of old papers and darkened nail bags with 
their nails rusted to prickly balls filled the corner of the room. 

As the children stood in the entrance a bat flew from the rear 
of the house. The grey shape swooped from side to side and 
disappeared through the doorway. 

The boys conducted Abra through the house - opened closets 
to show wash-basins and, toilets and chandeliers, still crated and 
waiting to be installed. A smell of mildew and of wet paper was 
in the air. The three children walked on tiptoe, and they did not 
speak for fear of the echoes from the walls of the empty house. 

Back in the big sala the twins faced their guest. ‘Do you like 
it?’ Aron asked softly because of the echo. 

. *Yee'es,’ she admitted hesitantly. 

‘Sometimes we play here,’ Cal said boldly. *¥00 can come here 
and play with us if you like.’ 

‘I live in Salinas,’ Abra said in such a tone that they knew 
they were dealing with a superior being who hadn’t time for 
bumpkin pleasures. 

Abra saw that she had crushed their highest treasure, and 
while she knew the weaknesses of men she still liked them, and, 
besides, she was a lady. ‘Sometimes, when we are driving by. 
I’ll come and play with you - a little,’ she said kindly, and both 
boys felt grateful to her. 

‘I’ll ^ve you my rabbit,’ said Cal suddenly. ‘I was going to 
give it to my father, but you can have it.’ 

‘What rabbit?’ 

‘The one we shot today — right through the heart with an 
arrow. He hardly even kicked.’ 

Aron looked at him in outrage. ‘It was my — ’ 

Cal interrupted. ‘We will let you have it to take home. It’s- a 
pretty big one.’ 

Abra said, ‘What would I want with a dirty old rabbit aU 
covered with blood?’ 

Aron said, ‘I’ll wash him off and put him in a box and tie him 
with string, and if you don’t want to' eat him, you-ean have a 

funeral when you get time — in Salinas.^ ' 

329 



/i go, to real , funerals/ said Abra. -'Went to one yesterday. 
There was flowers high as this roof.’ 

‘Don’t you v/ant our rabbit?’ Aron asked. 

. Abra looked at liis sunny hair, tight-curled now, and at his 
e3'es that seemed so near to tears, and she felt the longing and 
the itching bum in her chest that is the beginning of love. Also, ¦ 
she wanted to touch Aron, and she did. She put her hand on his 
¦ arm and - felt him shiver under her fingers. ‘If you put it in a- 
box/ she said. ' , ' 

Now that she liad got herself in charge, Abra looked around 
and inspected her conquests. She was \yell above vanity' now that , 

. no male principle threatened her. She felt kindly towards these 
boys. She notic^ their thin washed-out clothes patched- here 
and there by Lee. She dretv on her fairy tales. ‘You poor child- 
ren/ she said, 'does your father beat you?’ 

They' shook their heads. They were interested but bewildered. 

‘Arc you very' poor?’ 

‘How do you mean?’ Cal asked. 

¦Do you sit in the ashes and have to fetch water and faggots?’- 
- 'What’s faggots?’ Aron asked. • 

She avoided that by continuing, ‘Poor darlings/ she began, 
and she seemed to herself to have a little wand in her hand . 
tipped by a twinkling star. ‘Does your twoked step-mother hate 
you and want to kill you?’ 

‘We don’t have a step-mother/ said Cal. 

‘We don’t have any kind/ said Aron. ‘Our mother’s d^.d.’ 

His words destroyed the story she was WTiting but almost im- 
/^mediately supplied her with another. The wand W’as gone but 
tc wore a big hat with an ostrich plume and she carried an ' 
¦'uii.Dus basket from which a turkey’s feet protruded. 

‘Little motherless orphans/ she said sweetly. ‘I’ll- be your 
mother. I’ll hold you and rock you and tell you stories/ 

• . AVe’re too big/ said Cal. ‘We’d overset you.’ 

Abra looked . aw’ay from his brutality. Aron, she. sawi -was 
¦caught up in her story. His ey'cs were smiling and he seemed 
almost to be rocking in her arms, and she "felt again the tug of - 
love , for him. She said pleasantly, ‘Tell me, did your mother 
har'C a nice' funeral?’ 

. ‘We don’t remember/ said Aron. ‘We were too little.’’ 

“Well, where is she buried? You could put flowers on her 
grave. We alway's do that for Grandma and Uncle Albert.’ 

‘We don’t know/ said Aron. ... 

Cal’s eyes had a new interest, a - gleaming interest tliat was 

330 . • , ; 



close to triumph. He said naively. Til ask our father where it is 
so we can take flowers.’ - 

.. ‘I’ll go with you,’ said Abra. ‘I can make a wreath; I’ll show 
you how,’ She noticed that Aron had not spoken. ‘Don’t you 
want to make a wreath?’ 

‘Yes,’ he said. 

She had to touch him again. She patted his shoulder and then 
touched his cheek. ‘Your mama will like that,’ she said. “Even in 
Heaven they look down and notice. My father says they do. He 
knows a poem about it.’ 

Aron said, ‘I’ll go and wrap up the rabbit. I’ve got the box my 
pants came in.’ He ran out of the old house. Cal watched him 
go. He was smiling. 

‘What are you laughing at?’ Abra asked. 

;‘Oh, nothing,’ he said. Cal’s eyes stayrf on her. 

She tried to stare him down. She was an expert at staring 
down, but Cal did not look away. At very first he had felt a 
shyness, but that was gone now, and the sense of triumph at 
destroying Abra’s control made him laugh. He knew she pre- 
ferred his brother, but that was nothing new to him. Nearly 
everyone preferred Aron with his golden hair and the openness 
that allowed his affection to plunge like a puppy. Cal’s emotions 
hid deep in him and peered out, ready to retreat or attack. He 
was starting to punish Abra for liking his brother, and this was 
nothing new either. He had done it since he first discovered he 
could. And secret punishment had grown to be almost a creative 
thing with him. 

.Maybe the difference between the two boys can best be des- 
cribed in this way. If Aron should come upon an ant-hill in a 
little clearing in the brush, he would lie on his stomach and 
watch the complications of ant life— he would see some of them 
bringing food in the ant roads and others carrying the white 
eggs. He woiild see how two members of the hiH on meeting put 
their antennae together and talked. For horns he would lie ab- 
sorbed in the economy of the ground. 

If, on the o&er hand. Cal came upon the same ant-hill, he 
would kick it to pieces and watch while the frantic ants took 
care of their disaster. Aron was content to be part of his world, 
but Cal must change it. 

Cal did not question the fact that people liked his bn^er bet- 
ter, but he had developed a means for making it all right noth 
himself. He planned and waited until one time that admiring 
person exposed himself, and then something happened and^Ae 

331 



victim never knew hD\y or why. Out of revenge Cal extracted a 
fluid of power, and put of power,' joy. It. was the strongest, 
purest emotion he knew. Far from disliking Aron, he loved him 
because he was- usually the cause for Cal’s feeling of triumph.. 
He had forgotten -if he had ever knoum - thathe pimishcd be-. 
cause he wished he could.be loved as Aron was loved. It had. 
gone so far that he preferred what he had to what Aron had. - 

Abra had started a process in Cal by touching Aron and by 
the softness of her voice to\vards him. Cal’s reaction was auto- 
matic. His brain probed for a weakness in Abra, and so clever, 
was he- that he found one almost' at once in her. words. Some 
children want to be babies and some want to be adults. Few are 
content with their age. Abra wanted to be an adult. She Used 
adult words and simulated, in so far as she was able, adult atti- 
tudes and emotions. She had left -babyhood far behind, and she 
was not capable yet of facing one pf the grown-ups she admired. 
Cal sensed this, and it gave him the instrument to knock down 
her ant-hill. 

He knew about how long it would take his brother to find the 
box. He could see in his mind what would happen. Aron would . 
try to wash the blood o5 the rabbit, and this would take time. 
Finding string would take more time, and the careful tying of ¦ 
bow knots still more time. And meanwhile .Cal knew he was be- 
. ginning to win. He felt Abra’s certainty wavering and he knc\v- 
that he could prod it further. ¦ - ¦ 

Abra looked away from him at last and said, ‘What do you 
stare at a person for?’ 

Cal looked at her feet and slowly raised his ^'cs, going over 
••her as coldly as if she were a chair. This, he knew, could make 
'even an adult nervous. 

Abra couldn’t stand it. She said, ‘See anything'green?’ 

Cal asked, ‘Do you go to school?’ 

‘Of course I do.’ 

‘What grade?' 

‘High fifth.’ 

'How old are you?’ 

‘Going on eleven.’ 

Cal laughed. 

‘What’s wrong with that?’ she demanded. He didn’t answer 
her. ‘Come- on, tell me! Wliat’s wrong with that?’ Still no 
answer. ‘You flunk you’re mighty smart,’ she said, and when he 
continued to laugh at her she said uneasily, ‘I wonder tvliat’s 
taking j'our brother so long. Look, the rain’s stopped.' 

332 



Cal said, ‘I guess he* s looking around for it.’ 

'You mean, for the rabbit?’ 

Oh, no. He s got that all right— it’s dead. But maybe he can’t 
catch the other. It gets away.’ 

‘Catch what? What gets away?’ 

‘He wouldn’t want me to tell,’ said Cal. ‘He wants it to be a 
surprise. He caught it last Friday. It bit him too.’ 

‘Whatever are you talking about?’ 

‘You’ll see,’ said Cal, ‘when you open the box. I bet he tells 
you not to open it right off.’ This was not a guess. Cal knew his 
brother. 

Abra knew she was losing not only the battle but the whole 
war. She began to hate this boy. In her mind she went over the 
deadly retorts she knew and gave them all up in helplessness, 
feeling they would have no eSect. She retired into silence. She 
walked out of the door and looked towards the house where her 


parents were. 

‘I think I’ll go back,’ she said. 

‘Wait,’ said Cal. 

She turned as he came up with her. ‘What do you want?’ she 
asked coldly. 

‘Don’t be mad at me,' he said. ‘You don’t know what goes on 
here. Yod’ should see my brother’s back.’ 

His change of pace ^wildered- her. He never let her get set in 
an attitude, and he had properly read her interest in romantic 
situations. His voice was low and secret. She lowered her voice 
to match his. 

‘WItat do you mean? What’s wrong with his back?’ 

‘All scars,’ said Cal. ‘It’s the Chinaman.’ 

She shivered and tensed with interest. ‘What does he do? Does 
heb^thim?’ 

‘Worse than that,’ said Cal. 

• ‘Why don’t you tell your father?’ 

•We don’t dare. Do you know wha'rwould happen if we told?’ 

' ‘No. What?’ 

He shook his head. ‘No’ -he seemed to think carefully -‘I 

don’t even dare tell you.’ .... . t, ' > 

At that moment Lee came from the shed leadmg the 
horse hitched to the high spindly rig with rubber _tyr«. iw and 
kirs Bacon came out of the house and automancally they all 

looked up at the sky. , , , 

Cal said, ‘I can’t tell you now. The Chinaman would know if 
I told.’ 

j 


333 



Mrs Bacon called, ‘Abra ! Hurry! Wet’re going.’ - ' 

Lee held, the restive horse while Mrs Bacon Was helped up 
intothe rig. ¦ ' . ' , • ¦ ; • 

Aron came dashing round the house, carrying a cardboard 
box intricately tied with string in fancy bow knots. He thrust it 
at Abra. ‘Here/ he said. ‘Don’t untie it until you get home.’ 

• Cal saw revulsion on Abra’s face. Her hands shrank away 
from the box. , 

‘Take it, dear/ her father said. ‘Hurry, we’re very late.’ He 
thrust the box into her hands. 

Cal stepped close to her. ‘I want to whisper,’ he said. He put 
his mouth to her ear. ‘You’ve wet your pants,’ he said. She 
blushed and pulled the sunbonnet up over her head. Mrs 
Bacon picked her up under the arms and passed her iiito the 
buggy.- 

Lee and Adam and the twins watched the horse pick up a fine 
trot. 

Before the first turn Abra’s hand came up and the box went 
sailing backward into the road. Cal watched his brother’s face 
and saw misery come into Aron’s eyes. When Adam had gone . 
back into the house and Lee was moving out with a pan of grain 
to feed the chickens. Cal put his arm around his brother’s shoul- 
ders and hugged him reassuringly, 

‘I wanted to marry her,’ Aron said. ‘I put a letter in the box, 
asking her.’ 

Don’t be sad,’ said Cal. ‘Fm going to let you use my rifle.’ 

Aron’s head jerked round. ‘You haven’t got a rifle.’. 

‘Haven’t I?’ Cal said. ‘Haven’t I, though?’ 


CHAPTER 28 / 

I 

I T w A S at the supper table that the boys discovered the change 
in their father. They knew him as a presence— as ears that heard' 
but did not listen, eyes that looked but did not notice. He was a 
cloud of a father. The boys had never learnt to tell him of their 
interests and discoveries, or of their geeds, Lee had been their 
contact with the adult world, and Lee had managed not only to 
raise, feed, clothe, and discipline the boys, but had also given 
them a respect for their father. He was a mystery to the boys, 

334 



and his v/ord, his law, was carried down by Lee, who naturally 
made it up himself and ascribed it to Adam. 

This night, the first after Adam’s return from Salinas, Cal and 
Aron were first astonished and then a little embarrassed to find 
that Adam listened to them and asked questions, looked at them 
and saw them. The change made them timid. 

Adam said, T hear you were hunting today.’ 

The boys became cautious as humans always are, faced with a 
new situation. After a pause Aron admitted, ‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘Did you get anything?’ 

This time a longer pause, and then, ‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘What did you' get?’ 

‘A rabbit’ 

‘With bows and arrows? Who got him?’ 

Aron said, ‘We both shot. We don’t know which one hit.' 

Adam said, ‘Don’t you know your own arrows? We used to 
mark our arrows when I was a boy.’ 

This time Aron refused to answ’cr and get into trouble. And 
Cal, after waiting, said, ‘WeU, it was my arrow, all right, but we 
thinlc it might have got in Aron’s quiver.’ 

‘What makes you think that?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ Cal said. ‘But I think it was Aron hit the 
rabbit.’ 

Adam, swung his eyes. ‘And what do you think?’ 

‘I think maybe I hit it -but I’m not sure.’ 

‘Well, you both seem to handle the situation very well.’ 

The alarm.vvent out of the faces of the boys. It did not seem 
to be a trap. 

‘Where is the rabbit?’ Adam asked. 

Cal said, ‘Aron gave it to Abra as a present.’ 

‘She threw it out,’ said Aron. 

,‘Why?’ 

‘I don’t know. I wanted to marry her too.’ 

‘You did?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘How about j'ou. Cal?’ 

‘I guess I’U let Aron have her,’ said Cal. 

Adam laughed, and the boys could not recall ever having 

heard him laugh. ‘Is she a nice little girl?’ he asked. 

_‘Oh, yes,’ said Aron.- ‘She’s nice, all right. She’s good and 

nice. 

la\v^^^^^ ^ ^ ^ she’s going to be my daughter-in- 


335 



•¦Lee cleared the table and after a quidt rattling in the kitchen 
he came back: ‘Ready, to 'go to bed?’ he asked the boys. 

¦• They glared in protest. Adam said, ‘Sit down and let them 
stay a ¦ivhile.’ , • • “ 

¦ .‘I’ve got the. accounts together. We can go over them later/ 
said Lee. ¦ . - • ¦ , , 

‘What accounts, Lee?’ 

. .. ‘The house and ranch accounts. You said you wanted to imow 
where j'ou stood.’ 

‘Not the accounts for over ten years, Lee ! ’ 

‘ ‘You never wanted to be bothered before.’ 

; ¦ ‘I guess that’s right. But sit a while. Aron wants to, marry the 
little girl who was here today.’ 

‘Are they engaged?’ Lee asked. '¦ 

‘I don’t think she’s accepted him yet,’ said Adam. That may 
give us some time.’ 

Cal had quickly lost his awe of the changed feeling in - the 
house, and had been examining this ant-hill with calculating 
eyes, trying to determine just how to kick it oyer. He made his 
decision. , • 

‘She’s a real nice girl,’ he said. ‘I like her. Know why? Well, 
she said to ask 5'ou where our mother’s grave is, so we can take • 
some flowers.’ 

‘Could we, Father?’ Aron asked. ‘She said she would teach us ' 
how to make wreaths.’ ' ¦ ' 

Adam’s mind raced. He was not good at lying, to begin with, 
and he hadn’t practised. The solution frightened him, it came . 
so quickly to his mind and so glibly to his tongue. Adam said, ‘I ’ 
wish we could do that, boys. But I’ll have to tell ' you. Your 
mother’s grave is clear across the counny where she came from.’ 

‘Why?’ Aron asked. 

‘Well, some people want to be buried in the place they came 
from.’ 

‘How did she get there?’ Cal asked. 

‘We put her on a train and sent her home — didn’t we, Lee?’ 

Lee nodded. ‘It’s the same with us,’ he said. ‘Nearly all 
Chinese get sent home to China after they die.’ 

'I know that,’ said Aron. ‘You told us that before.’ 

‘Did I?’ Lee asked. 

‘Sure you did,’ said Cal. He was \’aguely disappointed. 

' Adam quickly changed the subject. ‘Mr Bacon made a sug- 
gestion this afternoon,’ he began. ‘I’d like you boys to think 
about it. He said it might be better for you if we moved to 

336 



Salinas - better schools and lots of other children to play 
with.’ 

, The thought stunned the twins. Cal asked, ‘How about here?’ 

‘Well, we’d keep the ranch in case we want to come back.’ 

Aron said, ‘Abra lives in Salinas.’ And that was enough for 
Aron. Already he had forgotten the sailing box. All he could 
think of was a small apron and a sunbonnet and soft little 
fingers. 

Adam said, ‘Well, you think about it. Maybe you should go to 
bed now. Why didn’t you go to school today?’ 

‘The teacher’s sick,’ said Aron. 

Lee verified it. ‘Miss Culp has been sick for three days,’ he 
said. ‘They don’t have to go back until Monday. Come on, 
boys.’ 

... They followed him obediently from the room. 

II 

Adam sat smiling vaguely at the lamp and tapping his knee with 
a forefinger until Lee. came back. Adam said, ‘Do they know 
anything?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Lee. 

'Well, maybe u was fust the little girl/ 

Lee went to the kitchen and brought back a big cardboard 
box. ‘Here are the accounts. Every year has a rubber band round 
it. I’ve been over it. If s complete.’ 

‘You mean all accounts?’ 

Lee said, ‘You’ll find a book for each year and receipted bills 
for everything. You wanted to know how you stood. Here it is 
- all of it. Do you really think you’ll move?’ 

‘Well, I’m thinking of it.’ 

‘I wish there were some way you could tell the boys the truth.’ 

‘That would rob them of the good thoughts about their 
mother, Lee’. 

‘Have you thought of the other danger?’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Well, suppose'they find out the truth. Plenty of people know.’ 

‘Well, maybe when they’re older it will be easier for them.* 

‘I don’t believe that,’ said Lee. ‘But thafs not the wrs' 
danger.’ 

‘I guess I don’t follow you, Lee.’ 

‘Ifs the lie I’m thinking of. It might infect everything, 
ever found out you’d lied to them about this, the -tr*' 
would suffer. They wouldn’t believe anyth! — ’ 

337 


Tes, I see. But what can I tell them? I couldn’t tell them the 
whole truth.’ 

‘Maybe you can tell them a part truth, enough so that y'ou 
won’t suffer if they find out.’ v 

‘I’ll have to think about that, Lee.’ ¦ 

¦‘If you go to live in ‘Salinas it will be more dangerous.’ 

‘I’ll have to think about it.’ 

¦ Lee went on insistently, ‘My father told me about my mother 
when I was very little, and he didn’t spare me. He told me a 
number of times as I was growing. Of course it wasn’t the same, 
but it was pretty dreadful. I’m glad he told me, though. I 
wouldn’t like not to know.’ 

. ‘Do you want to tell me?’ 

‘No, I don’t want to. But it might persuade you tQ make some 
change for your own boys. Maybe if you just said she went 
away and don’t know where.’ 

‘But I do know.’ 

‘Yes, there’s the trouble. It’s bound to be all truth or part lie. 
Well, I can’t force you.’ 

‘I’ll think about it,’ said Adam. ‘What’s the story about your 
mother?’ 

‘You really want to hear?’ 

‘Only if you want to tell me.’ 

‘I’ll make it very short,’ said Lee. ‘My first memory is of liv- 
ing in a little dark shack alone with my father in the middle of a 
potato field, and with it the memory of my father telling me the 
story of my mother. His language was Cantonese, but whenever 
he told the story he spoke in high and beautiful Mandarin. All 
right, then. I’ll tell you — ’ And Lee looked back in time. 

‘I’ll have to tell you first that when you built the railroads in 
the West the terrible work of grading and laying ties and spik- 
ing the rails was done by many thousands of Chinese. They 
were cheap, they worked hard, and if they died no one had to 
worry. They were recruited largely from Canton, for the Can- 
tonese are short and strong and durable, and also they are not 
quarrelsome. They were brought in by contract, and perhaps 
the history of my father was a fairly typical one. 

‘You must know that a Chinese must pay aU of his debts on 
or before our New Year’s Day.. He starts every year clean. If he" 
does not, he loses face; but not only that -his family loses face. 
There are no excuses.’ 

- ‘That’s not a bad idea,’ said Adam. 

‘Well, good or bad, that’s the way of it. My father had some 

338 



bad luck. -He could not pay a debt. The family met and dis- 
pussed the situation. Ours is an honourable family. The bad 
luck was nobody’s fault, but the unpaid debt belonged to the 
whole family. They paid my father’s debt and then he had to 
repay them, and that was almost impossible. 

'One thing the recruiting agents for the railroad companies / 
did - they paid down a lump of money on the signing of the 
contract. In this way they caught a great many men who had 
fallen into debt. All of this was reasonable and honourable. 
There was only one black sorrow. 

‘My father was a young man recently married, and his tie to 
his wife was very strong and deep and warm, and hers to him 
must have been - overwhelming. Nevertheless, with good man- 
ners Aey said goodbye in the presence of the heads of the family. 

I have often thought that perhaps formal good maimers may he 
a cushion against heartbreak. 

‘The herds of men went like animals into the black hold of a 
ship, there to stay until they reached San Francisco six weeks 
later. And you can imagine what those holds were like. The 
merchandise had to be ddivered in some kind of working condi- 
tion, so it was not mistreated. And my people have learnt 
through the ages to live close together, to keep clean and fed 
under intolerable conditions. 

‘They were a week at sea before my father discovered my 
mother. She was dressed like a man and she had braided her hair 
in a man’s queue. By sitting very still and not talking she had 
not been discovered, and of course there were no examinations 
or vaccination then. She moved her mat closer to my father. 
They could not talk except mouth to ear in the dark. My father 
was angry at her disobedience, but he was glad too. 

‘Well, there it was. They were condemned to hard labour for 
five years. It did not occur to them to run away once they were 
in America, for they were honourable people and they had 
signed the contract.’ 

Lee paused, ‘I thought I could tell it in a few sentences,’ he 
said. ‘But you' don’t know the background. I’m going to get a 
cup of water - do you want some?’ 

•Yes,’ said Adam. ‘But there’s one thing I don’t understand. 
How could a woman do that kind of work?' 

‘I’ll be back in a moment,’ said Lee, and he went to the kit- 
chen. He brought back tin cups of water and put them on the 
table. He asked, ‘Now what did you want to know?’ 

“Hpw could your mother do a man’s wo"’'"” 

339 



Lee smiled. ‘My father said she was a strong womaHj and I 
believe a strong woman may be stronger than a man, particularly 
if she happras to Jhave love in her heart. I guess a loving woman 
is almost indestructible.’ . . 

Adam made a wry grimace. 

Lee said, ‘You’ll see one day, you’ll see.’ 

‘I didn’t mean to think badly,’ said Adam. ‘How could I know, 
out of one experience? Go on.’ 

‘One thing my mother did not whisper in my father’s ear dur- 
ing that long miserable crossing. And because a great many 
were deadly seasick, no remark was made of her Alness.’ 

Adam cried, ‘She wasn’t pregnant ! ’ 

‘She was pregnant,’ said Lee. ‘And she didn’t want to burden 
my father with' more worries.’ 

‘Did she know about it when she started?’ 

•No, she did not. I set my presence in the world at the most 
inconvenient time. It’s a longer story than I thought.’ , . • 

‘WeU, you can’t stop now,’ said Adam. 

‘No, I suppose not. In San Francisco the flood of muscle and 
bone flowed into cattle cars and the engines puffed up the moun- 
tains. They were going to dig hiUs in the Sierras and burrow 
nmnels under the peato. My mother got herded into another ' 
car, and my father didn’t see her imtA they got to their camp 
on a high mountain meadow. It was very beautiful, with green 
grass and flowers and the snow mountains aU around. And only 
then did she tell my father about me. 

‘They went to work. A woman’s muscles harden just as a 
man’s do and my mother had a muscular spirit too. She did the . 
pick and shovel work expected of her, and it must have been 
dreadful. But a panic worry settled on them about how she was 
going to have the baby.’ 

Adam said, ‘'Were they ignorant? Why couldn’t she have gone 
to the boss and told him she was a woman and pregnant? Surely 
they would have taken care of her.’ 

“You see?’ said Lee, ‘I haven’t told you enough. And tliaAs . 
why this is so long. They were not ignorant. These human cattle 
were imported for one thing ordy-to work. When the work was 
done, those who were not dead were to be shipped back. Only 
males were brought — no females. The country did not want 
them breeding. A man and a woman and a baby have a way of 
diggmg in, of pulling the earth where they are about them and 
scratching out a home. And then it takes’ all hell to root them 
out. But a crowd of men, nervous, lusting, restless, half sick 

. ,340 



\vith loneliness for women -why, they’ll go anywhere, and par- 
ticularly will they go home. And my mother was the only 
woman -in this pack of half-crazy, half-savage men. The longer 
the men worked and ate, the more restless they became. To the 
bosses they were not people but animals which could be dan- 
gerous if not controlled. You can see why my mother did not 
ask for help. Why, they” d have rushed her out of the camp and — 
who knows? — p>erhaps shot and buried her like a diseased cow. 
Fifteen men were shot for being a little mutinous. 

‘No — they kept order the only way our poor species has ever 
learned to keq5 order. We think there must be better ways but 
we never learn Aem — always the whip, the rope, the rifle. I wish 
I hadn’t started to tell 3uu this — ’ 

‘Why should you not tell me?’ Adam asked. 

‘I can see my father’s face when he told me. An old misery 
come back, raw and full of. pain. Telling it, my father had to 
stop and gain possession of himself, and when he continued he 
spoke sternly and he used hard sharp words almbst as though 
he wanted to cut himself with them. 

‘These two managed to stay close together by claiming she 
was my father’s nephew. The months went by and fortunately 
for them there was very little abdominal swelling, and she 
worked in pain and out of it. My father could only help her a 
little, apologizing, ‘‘My nephew is young and his bones are 
brittle,” They had no plan. They did not know what to do. 

‘And then my father figured out a plan. They would run into 
the high mountains to one of the higher meadows, and there 
beside a lake they, would make a burrow for the birthing, and 
when my mother was safe and the baby born, my father would 
come back and take his punishment. And he would sign for an 
extra five years to pay for his delinquent nephew. Pitiful as their 
escape was, it was all they had and it seemed a brighmess. The 
plan had two requirements - the timing had to be right and a 
supply of food was necessary.’ 

Lee said, ‘My parents’ - and he stopped, smiling over his use 
of the word, and it felt so good that he warmed it up - ‘my dear 
parents began to make their preparations. They saved a part of 
their daily rice and hid it under their sleeping mats. My father 
found a length of string and filed out a hook from a piece of 
wire, for there were trout to be caught in the mountain lakes. He 
stopped smoking to save the matches issued. And my mother 
collected every tattered scrap of cloth she could find and uj^ 
ravelled edges to make thread and sewed this ragbag to.'^ 

341 



with a splinter to make swaddling clothes for me. I- wish I had 
known her.’. . , • ' . • 

¦ ,‘So do 1/ said Adam. , ‘Did you ever tell this to .Sam.Hamil- 
ton?’ ' . , 

‘No. I didn’t. I wish I had. He loved a celebration of the 
human soul. Such thmgs were like a personal triumph to him.’ 

‘I hope they got there,’ said Adam. '' 

‘I know. And when my father would tell me I would say to 
him,. “Get to that lake -get my mother there -don’t let it hap- 
pen again, not this time. Just once let’s tell it: how you got to 
the lake and built a house of fir boughs.” And my father became 
very Chinese then. He said, “There’s more beauty in the truth 
even if it is dreadful beauty. The storji:ellers at the city gate 
twist life so that it looks sweet to the lazy and the stupid and 
the weak, and this only strengthens their infirmities, and teaches 
nothing, cutes nothing, nor does it let the heart soar.” ’ ; • 

‘Get on with it,’ Adam said irritably. 

Lee got up and went to the window and he finished the story, 
looking out at the stars that winked and blew in the. March 
wind. 

‘A little boulder jumped down a hill and broke my father’s leg. 
They set the leg and gave him cripples’ work, straightening used 
nails with a hammer on a rock. And whetlier with worry or 
work - it doesn’t matter - my mother went into early labour. 
And then the half -mad men Imew and they went all mad. One 
hunger sharpened another hunger, and one crime blotted but the 
one before it, and the little crimes committed against those starv- 
ing men flarfed into one gigantic maniac crime. 

‘My father heard the shout “Woman” and he knew. He tried 
to run and his leg re-broke under him and he crawled up the 
ragged slope to the roadbed where it was happeriing. 

‘When he got there a kind of sorrow had come over, the sky, 
and the Canton men were creeping away to hide and to forget 
that men can be like this. My father came to her on the pile of 
shale. She had not even eyes to see out of, but her mouth still 
moved and she gave him his instructions. My father clawed me 
out of the tattered meat of my mother with his fingernails. She 
died on the shale in the afternoon.’ 

, Adam was breathing hard. Lee continued in a singsong 
cadence, ‘Before you hate those men you must know t!us. My 
father always told it at the last: No child ever had such care as 
I; The whole camp became my mother. It is a beauty - a dread- 
' ful kind of beauty. And now good night. I can’t talk any more.’ 

342 



Ill 


Adam restlessly opened drawers and looked up at the shelves 
and . raised the lids of boxes in his house and at last he was 
forced to call Lee back and ask, ‘Where’s the ink and the 
pen?’ 

‘You don’t have any,’ said- Lee. ‘You haven’t written a word 
in years. I’ll lend you mine if you vrant.’ He went to his roorri 
and brought back a squat bottle of ink and a stub pen and a pad 
of paper and an envelope and laid them on the table. 

Adam asked, ‘How do you know I want to tvrite a letter?’ 

‘You’re going to try to write to your brother, aren’t you?’ 

‘That’s right.’ 

‘It will be a hard thing to do after so long,’ said Lee. 

And it was hard. Adam nibbled and munched on the pen and 
his mouth became strained grimaces. Sentences were written and 
the page thro^vn awaj’’ and another started. Adam scratched his 
head with the penholder. ‘Lee, if I wanted to take a trip east, 
would you stay with the twins imtil I get back?’ 

‘It’s easier to go than to write,’ said Lee. ‘Sure I’ll stay.’ 

‘No. I’m going to write.’ 

‘Why don’t you ask your brother to come out here?’ 

‘Say, that’s a good idea, Lee. I didn’t think of it.’ 

‘It also gives you a reason for writing, and that’s a good 
thing.’ 

The letter came fairly easily then, was corrected and copied 
fair. Adam read it slowly to himself before he put it in the 
envelope. 

‘Dear brother Charles,’ it said. "You will be surprised to hear 
from me after so long. I have thought of writing many times, 
'but you know how a man puts it off. 

‘I wonder how this letter finds you. I trust in good health. For 
all I know you may have five or even ten children by now. Ha! 
Ha! I have two sons and they are twins. Their mother is not 
here. Coimtry life did not agree with her. She lives in a town 
near-by and I see her now and then. 

‘I have a fine ranch, but I am ashamed to say I do not keep it 
up very well. Maybe I will do better from now on. I always did 
make good resolutions. But for a number of years I felt poorly. 
I am well now. 

‘How are you and how do you prosper? I would like to see 
you. Why don’t you come to visit here? It is a great country and 
you might even find a place where you would like to settle 

343 



cold winters here. That makes a difference to “old men” like ns. 
Ha! Ha! . 

‘Well, Charles, I do hope j^ou will think about it and let me 
know. The trip would do you good. I want to see you. I have 
much to tell j'ou that I can’t wtIk down. 

‘Well, Charles, write me a letter and tell me all the news of 
the old home. I suppose many things have happened. As you get 
older you hear mostly about people you knew that died. I guess 
that is the way of the world. Write quick and tell me if you will 
come to visit. Your brother Adam.’ 

He sat holding the letter in his hand and looking over it at his 
brother’s dark face with its scarred forehead. Adam could see the 
glinting heat in the brown eyes, and as he looked he saw the lips 
tvrithe back from the teeth and the blind destructive animal take 
cliarge. He shook his head to rid his memory of the vision, and 
he tried to rebuild the face smiling. He tried to remember the 
forehead before the scar, but he could not bring either into focus, 
-He seized the pen and wtoK below his signatiue, ‘P.S. CIiarl&, 
I never hated you no matter what. 1 always loved you because 
J'OU were my brother.’ 

Adam folded the letter and forced the creases sharp with his 
fingernails. He sealed the envelope flap tvith his fist. ‘Lee!’ he 
called, ‘Oh, Lee I ’ 

The Chinese looked in through tlie door. 

‘Lee, how long does it take a letter to go east -clear east?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Lee. ‘Two weeks maybe.’ 


CHAPTER29 

After his first letter to his brother in over ten years was 
mailed Adam became impatient for an answer. He forgot how 
much time had elapsed. Before the letter got as far as San Fran- 
cisco he was asking aloud in Lee’s hearing, ‘I wonder .why he 
doesn’t answer. Maybe he’s mad at me for not writing. But he 
didn’t write cither. No - he didn’t know where to write. Alaybe 
he’s moved away.’ 

Lee' answered. ‘It’s only been gone a few daj’s. Give it time.’ 

‘I wonder whether he would really come out here?’ Adam 
asked himself, and he wondered whether he' uunted .Charles. 
Now that the letter was gone, Adam was afraid Charles might 
accept. He was like a restless child whose fingers stray to every 

344 



loose article. He mterfered^\vith the twins, asked them innumer- 
able questions about school. 

'Well, what did you learn today?’ 

‘Nothing!’ 

‘Oh, come 1 You must have learned something. Did you read?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘What did you read?’ 

‘That old one about the grasshopper and the ant.’ 

‘Well, that’s interesting.’ 

‘There’s one about an eagle carries a baby away.’ 

‘Yes, I remember that one. I forget what happens.’ 

‘We aren’t to it yet. We saw the picmres.’ 

The boys were disgusted. During one of Adam’s moments of 
fatherly bungling Cal borrowed his pocket-knife, hoping he 
would forget to ask for it back. But the sap was beginning to 
nui freely in the wiUovvs. The bark would slip easily from a 
twig. Adam got his knife back to teach the boys to make willow 
whistles, a thing Lee had taught them three years before. To 
make it worse, Adam had forgotten how to make the cut. He 
couldn’t get a peep out of his whistles. 

At noon one day Will Hamilton came roaring and bumping 
up the road in a new Ford. The engine raced in its low gear, and 
the high top swayed like a storm-driven ship. The brass radi- 
ator and the Prestolite tank on the rtmning-board were blinding 
with brass polish. 

Will pulled up the brake lever, turned the switch straight 
down, and sat back in the leather seat. The car backfired several 
times without ignition because it was overheated. 

‘Here she is!’ Will called with false enthusiasm. He hated 
Fords with a deadly hatred, but they were daily building his for- 
tune. 

Adam and Lee hung over the exposed insides of the car while 
Will Hamilton, puffing under the bmrden of his new fat, ex- 
plained the workings of a mechanism he did not understand 
himself. 

It is hard now to imagine the difficulty of learning to start, 
drive, and maintain an automobile. Not only w'as the whole pro- 
cess complicated, but one had to start from scratch. Today’s 
children breathe in the theory, habits, and idiosyncrasies of the 
internal combustion engine in their cradles, but then you started 
with the blank belief that it would not run at all, and sometimes 
you were right. Also, to start the engine of a modem car yov "“r. 
just two things, turn a key and touch the starter. Ever; . 

345 



dse is automatic. The process used to be more complicated. It 
required .not only a good memorj',q strong arm, ati angelic tem- 
per, and a blind hope, but also a cermin amount of practice of 
magic, so that a man about to turn the crank of a Model T 
might be seen to spit on the ground and whisper a spell. 

. Will Hamilton explained the car and went back and explained 
it’again. His customers were tvide-eyed, interested as terriers, co- 
operative, and did not interrupt, but as he began for the third 
time Will saw that he was getting no place. . ' 

‘Tell you what!’ he said brightly. “You see this isn’t my line. 
I. wanted you to see her and listen to her before I made deh'very. 
Now, I’ll go back to town and tomorrow I’ll send back this cat 
with an expert, and he’ll tell you more in a few minutes than I 
. could in a week. But I just wanted you to see her.’ 

Win had forgotten some of his own instructions. He cranked • 
for a while and then borrowed a buggy and a horse from Adam 
and drove to town, but he promised to have a mechanic out the 
next day. 

It , - , 

There was no question of sending the twins to school the next 
day. They \vouldn’t have gone. The Ford stood tall and aloof 
and dour under the oak tree where Will had stopped it. Its new 
owners circled it and touched it now and then, the way you 
touch a dangerous horse to soothe him. , 

Lee said, ‘I wonder whether I’ll ever get used to' it.’ ' 

‘Of course you will,’ Adam said without conviction. ‘Why, 
’you’ll be driving aU over the county first thing you know.’ 

‘I will try to understand it,’ Lee said. ‘But drive it I will not’ 
The boys made little dives in and out, to touch something and 
leap away. ‘What’s this do-hickey. Father?’ 

‘Get your hands off that’ 

‘But what’s it for?’ 

‘I don’t know, but don’t touch it You don’t know what might 
happen.’ 

‘Didn’t the man tell you?’ 

‘-I don’t remember what he said.- Now you boys get awaj’ from 
it or I’ll have to send you to school. Do you hear me. Cal? Don’t 
open that’ 

Th^ had got up and were ready very early in the morning. 
By deven o’clock hysterical- nervousness had set in. The mech- 
anic drove up in the buggy in time for the midday meal. He 
wore box-toed shoes and Duchess trousers and his wide square 

¦346 



coat came almost to tus knees. Beside him in the buggy was a 
satchel in which were his working clothes and tools. He was 
nineteen and chewed tobacco, and from his three months in 
automobile school he had gained a great though vreary contempt; 
for human beings. He spat and threw the reins at Lee. 

Tut this hay-burner away,’ he said. Tiow do you tell which 
end is the front?’ And he climbed down the rig as an ambassa- 
dor comes.,out of a state train. He sneered at the w,-ins and 
turned coldly to Adam. ‘I hope I’m in time for dinner,’ he said. 

Lee and Adam stared at each other. They had forgotten about 
the noonday meal. 

In the house the godling grudgingly accepted cheese and 
bread and cold meat and pie and coffee and a piece of chocolate 
cake. 

‘I’m used to a hot dinner,’ he said. ‘You better keep those Idds 
av/ay if you want any car left.’ After a leisurely meal and a short 
rest on the porch the mechanic took his satchel into Adam’s 
bedroom. In a few minutes he emerged dressed in striped over- 
alls and a white cap which had ‘Ford’ printed on the front of 
its crowm. 

‘Well,’ he said. ‘Done any studying?’ 

‘Studying?’ Adam asked. 

‘Ain’t you even read the h'lerature in the book under the seat?’ 

‘I didn’t know it was there,’ said Adam. 

‘Oh, Lord,’ said the young man disgustedly. With a cour- 
ageous gathering of his moral forces he moved with decision to- 
wards the car. ‘Might as well get started,’ he said. ‘God knotvs 
how long it’s going to take if you ain’t studied.’ 

Adam said, ‘Mr Hamilton couldn’t start it last night.’ 

‘He always tries to start it on the magneto,’ said the sage. ‘Ail 
right! All right, come along. Know the prindples of a internal 
combustion engine?’ 

‘No,’ said Adam. 

'Oh, Jesus Christ!’ He lifted the tin flaps. ‘This-here is a in- 
ternal combustion engine,’ he said. 

Lee said quietly, ‘So young to be so erudite.’ 

The boy swung rotmd towards him, scovding. ‘What did you 
say?’ he demanded, and he asked Adam, ‘What did the Chink 
say?’ 

Lee spread his hands and smiled blandly. ‘Say velly smaht 
fella,’ he observed quiedy. ‘Mebbe go college. Velly wise.’ 

‘Just call me Joe!’ the boy said for -no reason at all, 
added, ‘College! What do them fellas knosv? Gan the- ' ^ 

34 ‘ 



timerj huh? Gan -they file h point? College!’ And he spat a 
brown disparaging cxMrraent bn the ground. The twins regarded 
him with admiration, and Cal collected spit on the back, of his 
tongue to practise. . - . 

'Adam said, ‘Lee was admiring your grasp of tlie subject.’ 

The truculence went out of the boy and magnanimity took its 
place. ‘Just call me Joe,’ he said. T ought to know it. Went to 
automobile school in. Chicago. That’s a real school -not like no 
college.’ And he said, ‘My old man says you take a good Chink, 

I mean a good one - why, he’s about as good as anybody. The^re 
honest.’ , 

‘But not the bad ones,’ said Lee. ^ 

‘Hell no 1 Not no high binders nor nothing like that. But good 
Chinks.’ 

‘I hope I may be included in that group? ’ 

‘You look like a good Chink to me. Just call me Joe.’ 

Adam was puzzled at the conversation, but the twins weren’t. 
Cal said experimentally to Aron, ‘Jus’ call me Joe,’ and Aron 
moved his lips trying out, ‘Jus’ call me Joe.’ 

The mechanic became professional again, but his tone was 
kinder. An amused friendliness took the place of lus former con- 
tempt. ‘This-here,’ he said, ‘is a internal combustion engine.’ 
They looked down at the ugly lump of iron with a certain awe. 

Now the boy went on so rapidly that the words ran together 
into a great song of the new era. ‘Operates through the explosion 
of gases in a enclosed space. Power of explosion is exerted on , 
piston and through connecting rod and crankshaft through 
transmission thence to rear wheels. Got that?’ They nodded 
¦', blankly, afraid to stop the flow. ‘Thc3^s two kinds, two-cycle 
^and four-cycle. This-here is four-cycle. Got that?’ 

Again they nodded. The twins, looking up into his face with 
adoration, nodded, 

‘That’s interesting,’ said Adam. 

Joe went on hurriedly. ‘Main difference of a Ford automobile 
from other kinds is its planetarj' transmission which operates on 
a rev-rcv-a-Iu-shun-ary principle.' He pulled up for a moment, 
liis face showing strain. And when his four listeners nodded 
again he cautioned them, ‘Don’t get the idea you know it all. 
The planetary system is, don’t forget, rev-a-lu-shun-ary. You 
better study up on it in the book. Now, if you got all that W'e’il 
go on to Operation of the Automobile.’ He said this in bold-face 
tj’pe, capital letters. He- was obviously glad to be done with the 1 
first part of the lecture, but he was no gladder than his listeners. 

34S 



The strain of concentration was beginning to tell on them, and 
it was not made any better by the fact that they had not udder- 
stood one single word. 

‘Come around here/ said the boy. ‘Now you see that-there? 
Thafs the ignition key. When you turn that-there you’re ready 
to go ahead. Now, you push this do-hickey to the left. That puts 
her on, battery - see, where it says Bat. That means battery.’ 
They craned their necks into the car. The twins were standing 
on the' ruiming-board. 

‘No -wait. I got ahead of myself. First you got to retard the 
spark and advance the gas, else she’ll kick your goddam arm 
off. This-here-see it? -this-here’s the spark. You push it up- 
get itPr^Mp. Clear up. And this here’s the gas -you push her 
down. Now I’m going to explain it and then I’m going to do it. 
I want you to pay attmtion. You kids get off the car. You’re in 
my light. Get down, goddam it.’ The boys reluctantly climbed 
down from the running-board; only their eyes looked over the 
door. ’ 

He took a deep breath. ‘Now, you r^dy? Spark retarded, gas 
advanced. Spark up, gas down. Now switch to battery -left, re- 
member-left.’ A buzzing like that of a gigantic bee sounded. 
‘Hear that? That’s the contact in one of the coil boxes. If you 
don’t get that, you got to adjust the points or maybe file them.’ 
He noticed a look of consternation on Adam’s face. ‘You can 
study up on that in the book,’ he said kindly. 

He moved to the front of the car. ‘Now this-here is the crank 
and -see this little wire sticking out of the radiator? - that’s the 
choke. Now watch careful while I show you. You grab the 
crank like this and push till she catches. See how my thumb is 
turned down? If I grabbed her the other way with my thumb 
around her, and she w^s to kick, why, she’d knock my thumb 
off. Got it?’ 

. He didn’t look up but he knew they were nodding. 

‘Now,’ he said, ‘Ibok careful. I push in and bring her up until 
I got compression, and then, why, I pull out this wire and I 
bring her around careful to suck gas in. Hear that sucking 
sound? That’s choke. But don’t pull her too much or you’ll 
flood her. Now, I let go the wire and give her a hell of a spin, 
and as soon as she catches I run around and advance the spark 
and retard the gas and I reach over and throw the switch quick 
over to rna^eto-see where it says Mag? - and there you ^r^^^ 
His likeners were limp. After all this they, bad , 

enginestarted. . ¦ 


349 



The boy kept at them. T want you to say after me now so you 
learn it. Spark up - gas down.’ 

They repeated in chorus’, ‘Spark up - gas down.’ 

. ‘Stvitch to Bat.’ 

‘Switch to Bat.’ 

‘Crank to compression, thumb dowm.’. 

‘Crank to compression, thumb down.’ 

‘Easy over — choke out.’ 

‘Easy over - choke out.’ 

‘Spin her.’ 

‘Spin her.’ 

‘Spark do\yn- gas up.’ , , 

‘Spark down -gas up.’ 

‘Switch to Mag.’ - 

‘Switch to Mag.’ 

- ‘Now we’ll go over her again. Just call me Joe.’ 

‘Just call you Joe.’ 

‘Not that. Spark up - gas down,' 

, A kind of weariness settled on Adam as they went over the ’ 
litany for the fourth time. The process seemed silly to him. He 
was relieved when a short time later Will Hamilton drove up in 
his low sporty red car. The boy looked at the approaching ,ve-. 
liicle. ‘That-there’s got sixteen valves,’ he said in a rever^t tone, ' 
‘Special job.’ 

Will leaned out of his car, ‘How’s it going?’ he asked. 

‘Just fine,’ said the mechanic. ‘They catch on quick.’ 

‘Look, Roy, I’ve got to take you in. The new hearse knocked 
out a bearing. You’ll have to work late to get it ready for Mrs 
Hawks at eleven tomorrow.’ 

¦i Roy snapped to efficient attention. Til get my clos’,’ he said 
and ran for the house. As he tore back with his satchel Cal stood 
in his way. 

‘Hey,’ Cal said, ‘I thought your name was Joe.’ 

‘How do you mean, Joe?’ 

‘You told us to call you Joe. Mr Hamilton says you’re Roy.' 

Roy laughed and jumped into the roadster. ‘Know why I say 
call me Joe?’ 

‘No. Why?’ 

‘Because my name is Roy.’ In the midst of his laughter he 
stopped and said sternly to Adam, ‘You get that book under the 
seat and you study up. Hear me?’ 

‘I will,’ said Adam. 


350 


CHAPTER 30 


r 


Even as in Biblical times, there were miracles on the earth 
in those days. One week after the lesson a Ford bumped up the 
main street of King City and pulled to a shuddering stop in 
front of the post oflSce. Adam sat at the wheel with Lee beside 
him and the two boys straight and grand in the back seat. 

Adam looked down at the floorboards, and all four chanted in 
unison, ‘Brake on -advance gas -switch off.’ The little engine 
roared and then stopped. Adam sat back for a moment, limp but 
proud, before he got out. 

The postmaster looked out between the bars of his golden 
grill. T see you’ve got one of those damn things,’ he said. 

‘Have to keep up with the times,’ said Adam. 

‘I predict there’ll come a time when you can’t find a horse, Mr 
Trask.’ 

‘Maybe so.’ 

‘They’ll change the face of the countryside. They get their 
clatter into everything,’ the postmaster went on. ‘We even feel it 
here. Man used to come for his mail once a week. Now he comes 
every day, sometimes twice a day. He just can’t wait for his 
damn catalogue. Running around. Always running around.’ He 
was so violent in his dislike that Adam knew he hadn’t bought a 
Ford yet. It was a kind of jealousy coming out. ‘I wouldn’t have 
one around,’ the postmaster said, and this meant that his wife 
was at him to buy one. It was the women who put the pressure 
on. Social status was involved. 

The postmaster angrily shuffled through the letters from the 
T box and tossed out a long envelope. ‘Well, FU see you in the 
hospital,’ he said viciously. 

Adam smiled at him and took his letter and walked out. 

A man who gets few letters does not open one lightly. He 
hefts it for weight, reads the name of the sender on the envelope 
and the address, looks at the handwriting, and studies the post- 
mark and the date. Adam was out of the post office and across 
the sidewalk to his Ford before he had done all of these things. 


The left-hand corner of the envelope had printed on it. Bellows 
and Harvey, Attorneys at Law, and their address was the town 


in Connecticut from which Adam had come. 

He said in a pleasant tone, ‘Why I know Bellows ar\. 



351 



know tbem well. I wonder what thej' want?’ He looked closdy 
at the envelope.' ‘I wonder how they got my address?’ He turned 
the envelope over and looked '^at the back. Lee watched him, 

. smiling. ‘Maybe the quKtions are answered in the letter.’ 

!! guess. so/ Adam said.'Once having decided to open the let- 
¦ter, he took nut his pocket-knife, opened the big blade and in- 
spected the envelope for a. point of ingress, found none, held 
the letter tip to the sun-to make sure not to cut the message, 
tapped the letter to one end of the envelope, and cut off the other 
end. He blew in' the end and extracted the letter with two fingers, 
He read the letter very slowly. . ... 

¦ ‘Mr Adam .Trask, King City, Caliform’a. Dear Sir/ it began 
testily, ‘For the last six months we have exhausted every mrans 
of. locating you. We have ad\'ertised in newspapers all over the 
country without success. It was only when your letter to your 
brother was turned over to us by the local postraast^ that we 
were able to ascertain your whereabouts.’ Adam could feel their 
impatience with him. The next paragraph began a complete 
cten^ of mood. ‘It is our sad duty to inform you that your 
brother, Charles Trask, is deceased. He died of a lung ailment^ 
October 12 after an illness of two weeks, and his body msts in 
the Odd Fellows cemetery. No stone marks his grave. We pre- 
sume you will want to undertake this sorrowful duty yourself/ 

Adam drew a deep full breath and held it while he read the 
paragraph again. He breathed out slowly to keep the release 
from being a sigh. ‘My brother Charles is dead/ he said. 

‘I’m sorry,’ said Lee. 

Cal said, ‘Is he our uncle?’ 

‘He was your Uncle Charles/ said Adam. 

‘Mine too?’ Aron asked. 

‘Yours too.’ 

‘I didn’t know we had him/ Aron said. ‘Maybe we can 
put some flowers on his grave. Abra could help us. She likes 
to.’ 

‘It’s a long way off - clear across the'eountry.’ 

Aron said excitedly, ‘I know! When we take flowws to our 
mother we’ll take some to our Uncle Charles.’ And he said a 
little sadly, ‘I wish’t I knew I had him before he was dead/ He 
felt that he was growing rich in dead relatives. ‘Was he m'ce?' 
Aron asked. 

‘Very nice,’ said Adam. ‘He was my only brother, just like Cal 
is your only brother.’ 

‘Were you twins too?’ 


352 


‘No -not twins/ 

Cal askedj ‘Was he rich?’ 

. ‘Of course not/ said Adam. ‘Where’d you get that idea?’ ' 

‘Well, if he was rich we’d get it, wouldn’t we?’ 

Adam said sternly, ‘At a time of death it isn’t a nice thing to 
talk about money. We’re sad because he died.’ 

‘How can I be sad?’ said Cal. ‘I never saw him.’ 

Lee covered his mouth with his hand to conceal a smile. 
Adam looked back at the letter, and again it changed mood with 
its paragraph. 

‘As attorneys for the deceased it is our pleasant duty to inform 
you that your brother through industry and judgement amassed 
a considerable fortune, which in land, securities, and cash is well 
in excess of one hundred thousand doUars. His will, which was 
drawn and signed in this ofBce, is in our hands and will be sent 
to you On your request. By its terms it leaves all money, property, 
and securities to be divided equally between you and your wife. 
In the event that your wife is deceased, the total goes to you. 
The will also stipulates that if you are deceased, all property 
goes to your wife. We judge from your letter that you are still in 
the land' of the living and we wish to offer our congratulations. 
Your obedient servants. Bellows and Harvey, by George B. 
Harvey.’ And at the bottom of the page was scrawled, ‘Dear 
Adam: Forget not thy servants in the days of thy prosperity. 
Charles never spent a dime. He pinched a dollar imtil the eagle 
screamed. I hope you and your wife will get some pleasure from 
the money. Is there an opening out there for a good lawyer? I 
mean myself. Your old friend. Geo. Harvey.’ 

Adam looked over the edge of the letter at the boys and at Lee. 
AH three were waiting for him to continue. Adam’s mouth shut 
to a line! He folded the letter, put it in its envelope, and placed 
the envelope carefully in his inside pocket. 

‘Any complications?’ Lee asked. 

‘No.’ 

‘I just thought you looked concerned.’ 

‘I’m not. I’m sad about my brother.’ Adam was trying to 
arrange the letter’s information in his mind, and it was as rest- 
less as a setting hen scrounging into the nest. He felt that he 
would have-to be alone to absorb it. He climbed into the car and 
looked blankly at the mechanism. He couldn’t remember a single 
procedure. 

Lee asked, ‘Want some help?’ 

‘Funny ! ’ said Adam. ‘I can’t remember where to sta 

’353 



Lee and the boys began softly, ‘Spark up -gas dowTi, swtch 
over to Bat.’ , ¦ ' 

‘Oh yes. Of course, of course.’ And while the loud bee hummed 
in the coil box Adam cranked the Ford and ran to advance the 
spark and throw the sttdtch to Mag. 

They were driving slowly up the lumpy road of the home 
draw under the oak trees when Lee said, ‘We forgot to get meat.’ . 

¦ ‘Did we? I guess we did. Well, can’t we have something else?’ 

‘How about bacon and eggs?’ . 

‘That’s fine. That’s ^od.’ 

‘You’ll want to mail your answer tomorrow,’ said Lee.' ‘You 
can buy meat then.’ 

‘I guess so,’ said Adam. < 

While dinner was preparing Adam sat staring into space. He 
knew he would have to have help from Lee, if only the help of a 
listener to clear his own thinking. 

Cal had led his brother outside and conducted him to the 
wagon shed tvherc the tall Ford rested. Cal opened the door and 
sat behind the wheel. ‘Come on, get in!’ he said. - 

Aron protested, ‘Father told us to stay out of it.’ , ' 

‘He won’t ever know. Get in 1 ’ 

Aron climbed in timidly and eased back in the seat. Cal turned 
the wheel from side to side. ‘Honk, honk,’ he said, and then, 
‘Know what I think? I think Uncle Charles was rich.’ 

‘He was not.’ 

‘I bet you anything he was.’ 

¦ ‘You Aink our father’d tell a lie.’ 

‘I won’t say that. I just bet he was rich.’ They were silent for 
a while. Cal steered wildly around imaginary curves. He said, ‘I 
bet you I can find out.’ 

‘How do you mean?’ 

‘What do you bet?’ 

‘Nothing,’ said Aron. 

' ‘How about your deer’s-leg whistle? I bet you this here-taw 
against that deer's-leg whistle that we get sent to bed right after 
supper. Is it a bet?’ 

‘I guess so,’ Aron said vaguely. ‘I don’t see why.’ 

Gal said, ‘Father will want to talk to Lee. And I’m going to 
listen.’ 

‘You won’t dare.’ 

‘You think I won’t.’ 

‘S’pose'I was to tell.’ 

Cal’s eyes turned cold and his face darkened. He leaned so 
¦ 354 



close that his voice dropped to a whisper. ‘You won’t tell. Be- 
cause if you do - m tell who stole his knife,’ 

'Nobody stole his knife. He’s got his knife. He opened the 
letter with it.’ 

Cal smiled bleakly. ‘I mean tomorrow,’ he said. And Aron saw 
what he meant and knew he couldn’t tell. He couldn’t dp any- 
thing about it. Cal was perfectly safe. 

Cal saw the confusion and helplessness on Aron’s face and felt 
his power, and it made him glad. He could out-think and out- 
plan his brother. He was beginning to think he could do the 
same thing to his father. With Lee, Cal’s tricks did not work, for 
Lee’s bland mind moved effortlessly ahead of him and was always 
there waiting, understanding, and at the last moment cautioning 
quietly, ‘Don’t do it.’ Cal had respect for Lee and a little fear of 
him. But Aron here, looking helplessly at him, was a lump of 
soft mud in his hands. Cal suddenly felt a deep love for his 
brother and an impulse to protect him in his weakness. He put 
his arm around Aron. ' 

Aron did not flinch or respond. He drew back a little to see 
Cal’s face. 

Cal said, ‘See any green grass growing out of my head?’ 

Aron said, ‘I don’t know why you go for to do it.’ 

‘How do you mean? Do what?’ 

‘All the tricky, sneaky things,’ said Aron. 

‘What do you mean, sneaky?’ 

‘Well, about the rabbit, and sneaking here in the car. And you 
did something to Abra. I don’t know what, but it was you made 
her throw the box away.’ 

‘Ho,’ said Cal. ‘Wouldn’t you like to know!’ But he was im- 
'easy. 

Aron said slowly, ‘I wouldn’t want to know that. I’d like to 
know why you do it. You’re always at something. I just wonder 
why 3'ou do it. I wonder what’s it good for.’ 

A pain pierced Cal’s heart. His planning suddenly seemed 
mean and dirty to him. He kne%v that his brother had found him 
out. And he felt a longing for Aron to love him. He felt lost and 
¦ hungry and he didn’t know what to do. 

Aron opened the door of the Ford and climbed down and 
walked out of .the wagon shed. For a few moments Cal twisted 
the steering wheel and tried to imagine he was racing down the 
' road. But it wasn’t any good, and soon he followed Aron back 
towards the house. — 


355 



II 


When supper was finished and Lee had washed the dishes Adam 
said, 1 think you boys had better- go to bed. It’s been a big day.’ 

. Aron looked quickly at Cal and slowly took his dcer’s-lcg ¦ 
whistle out of his pocket. , - , . ' . . ' : 

Cal said, ‘I don’t want it/ , 

- Aron said, ‘It's yours now.’ 

•Well, I don’t want it. I won’t have it.’ 

Aron laid the bone whistle on the .table. ‘It’ll be here for you,’ 
he said. " . ' . 

Adam, broke in, ‘Say, what is this argument? I said you boys 
should go to bed.’ 

Cal put on-his ‘little boy’ face. ‘Why?’ he asked. ‘It’s too early 
togotobed.’ I 

Adam, said, ‘That wasn’t quite the truth I told you. I want to ' 
talk privately to Lee. And it’s getting dark so you can’t go out- 
side, so I want you boys to go to bed - at least to your room. Do 
. you understand ?’ 

Both boys said, ‘Yes, sir,’ and they followed Lee down the hall 
tojtheir bedroom at the back of the house. In their night-gowns 
they returned to say good night to their father. ' 

Lee came back to the living-room and closed the door to the 
hall. He picked up the deer’s-lcg whistle and inspected it and 
laid it down. ‘I wonder what went on there,’ he said.. 

‘How do you mean, Lee?’ 

‘Well, some bet was made before supper, and just after sup- , 
per Aron lost the bet and paid off. What were we talking about?’ 

‘All I can remember is telling them to go to bed.’ 

‘Well, maybe it will come out later,’ said Lee. 

‘Seems to me you put too much stock in the affairs of child- 
ren.- It probably didn’t mean anything.’ 

• ‘Yes, it meant something.’ Then he said, ‘Mr Trask do you 
think tlie thoughts of people suddenly become important at a 
given age? Do you have sharper feelings or clearer thoughts now 
than when you were ten? Do you see as well, hear as .well, taste 
as vitally?’ 

‘Maybe you’re right,’ said Adam. 

‘It’s one of the great fallacies, it seems to me,’ said Lee, ‘that 
time gives much of anything but years and sadness to a man.’ ' 

‘And memory.’ 

‘Yes, raemor}'. Without that, time would be unarmed against 
us. What did j'ou want to talk to me about?’ 

.356 



Adam took the letter from his pocket and put it on the table. 
‘I want you to read this, to read it carefully, and then -I want 
to talk about it.' Lee took, out his half-glasses and put them on. 
He opened the letter under the lamp and read it. 

Adam asked, ‘Well?’ 

‘Is there an opening here for a lawyer?’ 

‘How do you mean? Oh, I see. Are you making a joke?’ 

‘No,’ said Lee, ‘I was not making a joke. In my obscure but 
courteous Oriental manner I was indicating to you that I would 
prefer to know your opinion before I offered mine.’ 

‘Are you speaking sharply to me?’ 

‘Yes I am,’ said Lee. ‘I’ll lay aside my Oriental manner. I’m 
getting old and cantankerous. I am growing impatient. Haven’t 
you heard of all Chinese servants that when they get old they 
remain loyal but they turn mean?’ 

‘I don’t want to hint your feelings.’ 

‘They aren’t hurt. You want to talk about this letter. Then 
talk, and I will know from your talk whether I can offer an 
honest opinion or whether it is better to reassure you in your 
own.’ 

T don’t underetand it,’ said Adam helplessly. 

‘Well, you knew your brother. If you don’t imderstand it, how 
can I, who never saw him?’ 

Adam got tip and opened the hall door and did not see the 
shadow that slipped behind it. He went to his room and re- 
turned and put a faded brown daguerreotype on the table in 
front of Lee. ‘That is my brother, Charles,’ he said, and he went 
, back to the hall door and closed it. 

Lee studied the shiny metal imder the lamp, shifting the pic- 
ture this way and that to overcome the highlights. ‘It’s a long 
time ago,’ Adam said. ‘Before I went into the army.’ 

Lee leaned close to the picture. ‘It’s hard to make out. But 
from, his expression I wouldn’t say your brother had much 
humour.’ 

‘He hadn’t any,’ said Adam. ‘He never laughed.’ 

‘Well, that wasn’t exactly what I meant. When I read the 
terms of your brother’s will it struck me that he might have been 
a man with a particularly brutal sense of play. Did he like you?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Adam. ‘Sometimes I thought he loved mf . 
He tried to kill me once.’ 

Lee. said, ‘Yes, that’s in his face -both the love and murder. 

' And the two made a miser of him, and a miser is a frightened 
man hiding in a fortress of money. Did he know you^ 

,357 



• ‘Yes/ : . ^ . ¦- 

¦' ‘Did he love her?’ ‘ ¦ , ¦ '' ' '/ 

‘He' hated her.’ 

Lee si^ed. ‘It' doesn’t really matter. That’s not your problem, , 
is it?’ ’-' . • ' ¦ ' • ' 

• , ‘No.Itisn’t.’ . • V , ¦ ' ¦ ' 

‘Would you like to bring the problem out and look at it?’ ' . 

‘That’s what I want.’ 

‘Go ahead, then.’ . . ¦ 

‘I can’t seem to get my mind to work clearly.’ ... 

‘Would you like 'the to lay out the cards for you? The un-. 
involved can sometimes do that.l. 

‘That’s what I want.’. - , . 

‘Vei^ well, then.’ 'Suddenly Lee grunted 'and a look' of 
. astonisliment came over his face. He held his round chin in 
his thin small hand. ‘Holy thorns!’ he said. ‘I didn’t think of 
that.’ ' , ¦ ' 

Adam stirred uneasily. T wish you’d get off the; tack you’re 
sitting on,’ he said irritably. ‘You make me feel like a column of. 
figures on a blackboard.’ - ¦ . 

Lee took a pipe from his pocket, a long slender ebony stem 
with a little cup-like brass bowl. He filled tlie thimble bowl udth 
tobacco so fine-cut it looked like hair, then lighted tlte pipe, • 
took four long puffs, and let the pipe go out. 

‘Is that opium?’ Adam demanded. 

‘No,’ said Lee. ‘It’s a cheap brand of Chinese tobacco, and it 
has an unpleasant taste.’ 

‘Why do you smoke it, then?’ 

' ‘I don’t know,’ said Lee. T guess it reminds me of something 
- something I associate with clarity. Not very complicated.’ Lee’s 
eyelids half closed. ‘All right, then -I’m going to try and pull 
out your thoughts like egg noodles and let them dry in the sun. 
The woman is still your wife and she is still alive. Under tlie 
letter of the will she inherits something over fifty thousand dol- 
lars. That is a great deal of money. A sizeable chunk of good or 
.evil could be done with it. Would your brother, if he knew where 
she is and what she is doing, want her to have ^e money? Courts 
always try to follow the wishes of tlie testator.’ ‘ 

‘My brother would not want that,’ said Adam. And then he 
remembered the girls upstairs in the tavern and Charles’s peri- 
odic visits. 

‘Maybe you’ll have to think for your brother,’ said Lee. ‘What 
your wife is doing is neither good nor bad. Saints can spring 

358 


from any soil. Maybe with this money she would do some fine 
thing. There’s no springboard to philanthropy like a bad con- 
science.’ 

Adam shivered. 'She told me what she would do if she had 
money. It was closer to murder tlian to charity.’ 

‘You don’t think she should have the money, then?’ 

. ‘She said she would destroy many reputable men in Salinas. 
She can do it too.’ 

T see,’ said Lee. Tm glad I can take a detached view of this. 
The pants of their reputations must have some thin places. 
Morally, then, you would be against ^ving her the money?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Well, consider this. She has no name, no backgroimd. A 
whore springs full-blown from the earth. She couldn’t very well 
claim the money, if she knew about it, without your help.’ 

‘I guess that’s so. Yes, I can see that she might not be able to 
claim it without my help.’ 

Lee took up the pipe and picked out the ash with a little brass 
pin and filled the bowl again. While he drew in the four slow 
puffs his heavy lids raised and he watched Adam. 

‘It’s a very delicate moral problem,’ he said. ‘With your per- 
mission I shall offer it for the consideration of my honourable 
relatives - using no names of course. They will go over it as a 
boy goes over a dog for ticks. I’m sure they wiU get some in- 
teresting results.’ He laid his pipe on the table. ‘But you don’t 
have any choice, do you?’ 

‘What do you mean by that?’ Adam demanded. 

‘Well, do you? Do you know yottrself so much less than I 
do?’ 

‘I don’t know what to do,’ said Adam. ‘I’ll have to give it a 
lot of thought.’ 

Lee said angrily, ‘I guess I’ve been wasting my time. Are you 
lying to yourself or only to me?’ 

‘Don’t speak to me like that ! ’ Adam said. 

‘Why not? I have always disliked deception. Yoiir course is 
drawn. What you will do is \vritten- written in e\'ery breath 
you’ve ever taken. I’ll speak any way I want to. I’m crochety. 
I feel sand under my skin. I’m looking forward to the ugly smell 
of old books and the sweet smell of good thinking. Faced \vith 
two sets of morals, 3'ou’ll follow 3'our training. What you call 
thinking won’t change it. The fact that your wife is a whore in 
Salinas won’t change a thing.’ _ 

Adam got to his feet. His face was angry. ‘You are ir'" 

359 



now that you’ve decided to go . away,’ ’ he cried. ‘I tell you I ¦ 
havm’t made up my mind what to do about the money.’ . 

Lee sighed dteply. He pushed his small body erect tvith his 
hands against his knees. He walked wearily to the front door and 
opened it. He turned back and smiled at Adam. ‘Bull shit!’ he 
said amiably, and he went but and closed the door behind him. 

Ill 

Cal crept quietly down the dark hall and edged into the. room 
where he and his brother slept. He saw the outline of his 
brother’s head against the pillow in the double bed, but he could . 
not see W'hether Aron slept. Very gently he eased himself in on ¦ 
his side and turned slowly and laced his fingers behind his head 
and stared at the myriads of tiny coloured dots that make up 
' darkness. The window-blind bellied slowly in and then the night 
wind fell and the worn blind flapped quietly against the window. 

A grey, quilted melancholy descended on him. He wished with ¦ 
all his heart that Aron had not walked away from him oiit of the , 
wagon shed. He wished with all his heart that he had not , 
crouched listening at the hall door. He moved his lips in the 
darkness and made the words silently in his head arid yet he 
could hear them. 

‘Dear Lord,’ he said, ‘let me be like Aron. Don’t' make me 
mean. I don’t want to be. If you will let everybody like me, why. 
I’ll give you anything in the world, and if I haven’t got it, why, 
I’ll go for to get it. I don’t want to be mean. I, don’t want to be 
lonely. For Jesus’s sake, Amen.’ Slow warm tears were running 
down his cheeks. His muscles were tight and he fought against 
making any crying sound or sniffle. • ' 

Aron whispered from his pillow in the dark, ‘You’re cold. 
You’ve got a chill.’ He stretched out his hand to Cal’s arm and 
felt the goose bumps there. He asked softly, ‘Did tJneie Charles 
have any money?’ 

‘No,’ said Cal. ' , . 

‘Well, you were out there long enough. What did Father want 
to talk about?’ 

Cal lay still, trying to control his breathing. 

‘Don’t you want to tell me?’ Aron asked. T don’t care if you 
don’t tell me.’ 

‘i’ll tell,’ Cal whispered. He turned on his side so that his back ¦ 
was towards his brotlier. ‘Father is going to send a wreath to our 
rriother. A great big goddam wreath of carnations.’ 



Aron half sat up in bed and asked excitedly, “He is? How’s he 
going to get it clear there?’ 

'On the train. Don’t talk so loud/ 

Aron dropped back to a whisper. ‘But how’s it going to keep 
fresh?’ 

‘With ice,’ said Cal. ‘They’re going to pack ice aU around it.’ 

Aron asked, ‘Won’t it take a lot of ice?’ 

‘A w'hole hell of a lot of ice,’ said Cal. ‘Go to sleep now.’ 

Aron was silent, and then he said, ‘I hope it gets there fresh 
and nice.’ 

‘It will,’ said Cal. And in his mind he cried, ‘Don’t let me be 
mean.’ 


CHAPTER 31 
. I 

Adam brooded around the house all morning, and at noon 
he went to find Lee, who was spading the dark composted earth 
of his vegetable garden and planting his spring vegetables, car- 
rots and beets, turnips, peas, and string beans, rutabaga and 
kale. The rows were straight planted under a tight-stretched 
string, and the pegs at the row ends carried the seed package to 
identify the row. On the edge of the garden in a cold frame the 
tomato and bdl pepper and cabbage sets were nearly ready for 
transplanting, waiting only for the passing of the frost danger. 

Adam said, ‘I guess I was stupid.’ 

Lee leaned on his spading fork and regarded him quietly. 

‘When are you going?’ he asked. 

‘I thought I would catch the two-forty. Then I can get the 
eight o’clock back.’ 

‘You could put it in a letter, you know,’ said Lee. 

‘I’ve thought of that. Would you write a letter?’ 

‘No. You’re right. I’m the stupid one there. No letters.’ 

‘I have to go,' said Adam. ‘I thought in all directions and 
always a leash snapped me back.’ 

Lee said, You can be unhonest in many ways, but not in that 
wa3^ Well, good luck. I’ll be interested to hear what she says and 
does/ . ' 

‘I’ll take the rig,’ said Adam. ‘I’ll leave it at the stabl“ 

City. I’m nervous about driving the Ford alone,’ 

361 



It was four-fifteen when Adam climbed the rickety steps and 
knocked on the weather-beaten door of Kate’s place. A new man 
opened tlie door, a square-faced Finn, dressed in shirt and trou- 
sers; red silk arm-bands held up his full sleeves. He left Adam 
standing on the porch and in a moment came back and led him 
to the dining-room. . ’ 

It was a large. undecorated room, the w^lls and woodwork 
painted white. A long square table filled the centre of the room, 
and on the white oilcloth cover the places were set -plates, cups 
and saucers, and cups upside down in the saucers. 

Kate sat at, the end of the table with an account book open 
briore her. Her dress was severe. She wore a green eyeshade, and 
she rolled a yellow - pencil restlessly in her fingers. She looked 
coldly at Adam as he stood in the doorway. 

‘What do you want now?’ she asked. 

The Finn stood behind Adam. 

Adam did not reply. He walked to the table and laid the let- 
ter in front of her on top of the account book. 

‘What’s this?’ she asked, and without waiting for a reply she 
read the letter quickly. ‘Go out and close the door,’ she told the 
Finn. . . 

Adam sat at the table beside her. He pushed the dishes aside to 
make a place for his hat. 

When tlie door was closed Kate said, ‘Is tins a joke? No, you 
haven’t got a joke in you.’ She considered. ‘Yoiir brother might 
be joking. You sure he’s dead?’ 

‘All I have is the letter,’ said Adam. 

‘What do you want me to do about it ? ’ 

Adam shrugged his shoulders. 

Kate said, ‘If you want me to sign anything, you’re wasting 
yotir time. What do you want?’ 

Adam drew his finger slowly around his black ribbon hat- 
band. ‘Why don’t you write down the name of the firm and get 
in touch with them yourself?’ 

‘What have you told them about me?’ 

‘Nothing,’ said Adam. ‘I wrote to Charles and said you were 
living in another town, nothing more. He was dead when the 
letter got there. The letter went to the lawyers. It tells about it.’ 

¦ 'The one who wrote the postscript seems to be a friend of 
yours. What have you written him?’ 

‘I haven’t answered the letter yet.’ 

‘What do you intend to say when you answer it?’ 

‘The same tiling - that you live in another town.’ 



•You can’t say we’ve been divorced. We haven’t been.’ 

‘I don’t intend to.’ 

‘Do you want to know how much it will take to buy me off? 
I’ll take forty-five thousand in cash;’ 

‘No.’ 

‘What do you mean - no? You can’t bargain.’ 

‘I’m not bargaining. You have the letter, you know as much 
as I do. Do what you want.’ 

‘What makes you so cocky?’ 

‘I feel safe.’ 

She peered at him from under the green transparent eyeshade. 
Little ciurls of her hair lay on the bill like vines on a green roof. 
‘Adam, you’re a fool. If you had kept your mouth shut nobody 
would ever have known I was alive.’ 

‘I know that.’ 

‘You know it. Did you think I might be afraid to claim the 
money? You’re a damn fool if you thought that.’ 

Adam said patiently, ‘I don’t care what you do.’ 

She smiled cynically at him. ‘You don’t, huh? Suppose I 
should tell you that there’s a permanent order in the sheriff’s 
office, left there by the old sheriff, that if I ever use your name 
or admit I’m your wife I’ll get a floater out of the county and 
out of the state. Does that tempt you?’ 

, ‘Tempt me to do what?’ 

‘To get me floated and take all the money.’ 

‘I brought you the letter,’ Adam said patiently. 

‘I want to know why.’ 

Adam said, ‘I’m not interested in what you think or in what 
you think of me. Charles left you the money in his will. He 
didn’t put any strings on it. I haven’t seen the will, but he 
wanted you to have the money.’ 

‘You’re playing a close game with fifty thousand dollars,’ she 
said, ‘and you’re hot going to get away with it. I don’t know 
what the trick is, but I’m gioing to find out.’ And then she said, 
‘What am I thiiiing about? You’re not smart. Who’s advising 
you?’ 

‘No one.’ 

‘How about that Chinaman? He’s smart.’ 

‘He gave me no advice,’ Adam was interested in his own com- 
plete lack of emotion. He didn’t really feel that he was here at 
all. When he glanced at her he surprised an emotion on her face 
he had never seen before., Kate was afraid — she .was afraid of 
lum. But why? 


363 



.’She controlled her face and whipped the fear from it. ‘You’re 
,just doing it because you’re honest, is that it? You’re just too 
sugar-sweet to live.’ . ' 

,‘I haiin’t thought of it,’ Adam said. ‘It’s your money and I’m 
not a thief. It doesn’t matter to me what you think about it’ . 

Kate pushed the eyeshade, back on her head. "You want me to 
think you’re just dropping this money in my lap. Well, I’U find, 
out what you’re up to. Don’t think I won’t take care of myself. 
Did.you t hink I’d take such a stupid bait?’ 

‘Where.do you get your mail?’ he asked patiently. 

‘What’s that to you?’ 

‘I’ll wnrite the lawyers where to get in touch with you.’ ¦ 

. ‘Don’t you do it!’ she said. She put the letter in the account 
bcrok and closed the cover. ‘I’ll keep this. FU get legal advice. 
Don’t think I won’t. You can drop the innocence now.’ 

“You do that,’ Adam said. ‘I want you to have what is yours.'- 
Charles willed you the money. It isn’t mine.’ 

'Fll find the trick. I’ll find it.’ 

Adam said, ‘I guess you can’t understand it. I don’t itiuch. 
care. There arc so many things I don’t understand. ,I don’t 
understand how you could shoot me and desert your sons. I 
don’t imderstand how you or anyone could live like this.’ He 
%vavcd his hand to indicate the house. 

‘Who asked you to understand?’ 

Adam stood up and took his hat from the table. ‘I guess that’s 
all,’ he said. ‘Goodbye.’ He walked towards the door. 

She called after him, ‘You’re changed, Mr Mouse. Have you 
got a woman at last?’ 

Adam stopped and slowly turned and his eyes were thought- 
ful. ‘I hadn’t considered before,’ he said, and he moved towards 
her until he towered over her and she had to tilt back her head 
to look into his face. ‘I said I didn’t understand about you,’ he 
said slowly. ‘Just now it came to me what you don’t under- 
stand.’ 

“What don’t I understand, Mr Mouse?’ 

‘You know about the ugliness in people. You showed me the 
pictures. You use ail the sad, weak parts of a man, and God , 
knows he has them.’ 

‘Everybody — ’ 

Adtgn went on, astonished at his own thoughts, ‘But you- 
yes, that’s right -you don’t know about the rest. You don’t be- 
lieve I brought you the letter because I don’t want your money. 
You don’t believe I loved you. And the men who come to you 



here with' their ugliness, the men in the pictinres-you don’t bb- 
lieve those men could have goodness and beauty in them. You 
see only, one side, and you think -more than that, you’re stire- 
that’s all there is.’ 

• She cackled at him derisively. ‘In sticks and stones. What a 
sweet dreamer is Mr Mouse! Give me a sermon, Zvir Mouse.’ 

‘No. I won’t because I seem to know that there’s a part of you 
missing. Some men can’t see the colour green, but thej' may 
never know they can’t. I think you are only a part of a human. 
I can’t do anything about that. But I wonder whether you e\'er 
feel that something invisible is all around you. It would be hor- 
rible if -you knew it was there and couldn’t see it or feel it. That 
would be horrible.’ 

Kate pushed back her chair and stood up. Her fists were 
clenched at her sides and hiding in the folds of her skirt. She 
tried to prevent the shrillness that crept into her voice. 

‘Our Mouse is a philosopher,’ she said. 'But our Mouse is no 
better at that than he is at other things. Did you ever hear of 
hallucinations? If there are things I can’t see, don’t you think 
it’s possible that they are dreams manufactured in your own 
sick mind?’ 

‘No, I don’t,’ said Adam. ‘No, I don’t. And I don’t think you 
do either.’ He turnedrand went out and closed the door behind 
him. 

Kate sat down and stared at the closed door. She was not 
aware that her fists beat softly on the white oilcloth. But she did 
know that the square white door was distorted by tears and that 
her body shook with something that felt like rage and also felt 
[ike sorrow. 


II 

When Adam left Kate’s place he had over two hours to wait for 
the train back to King City. On an impulse he turned off Main 
Street and walked up Central Avenue to number 130, the liigh 
white house of Ernest Steinbeck. It was an immaculate and 
friendly house, grand, enough, but not pretentious, and it sat in- 
side its white fence, surrounded fay its clipped lawn, and roses 
and cotoneasters lapped against its white walls. 

Adam walked up the wide veranda steps and rang the bell. 
Olive came to the door and opened it a little, while Marj' and 
John pecked around the edges of her. 

Adam took off his hat. ‘You don’t know me. I’m Adar-^-a^k. 

365 ' - 



Your'father was a friend of mine. T thought Fd like to pay my 
respects to Mrs Hamilton. She helped me with the tivins.’ 

‘Why, of course/ Olive said; and swung the wide doors open. 
‘We’ve heard about yoii. Just’ a moment. You see,- we’ve made a 
-kind of retreat for Mother.’ ¦ - 

She knocked on a door off the wide front hall and called, 
‘Mother! There’s a friend to see you/ ' • ¦ , 

She opened the door and showed Adam into the pleasant 
room where Liza lived. ‘You’ll have to excuse me/ she said to 
Adam. ‘Catrina’s frying chicken and I have to watch her. John ! 
Mary ! Come along. Come along.’ 

Liza seemed smaller than ever. She sat in a wicker rocking- 
chair and she was old and old. Her dress was a full wide-skirted 
black alpaca, and at her throat she wore a pin which spelled 
‘Mother’ in golden script. 

The pleasant little bed-sitting-room was crowded, with, photo- 
graphs, bottles of toilet water, lace pin-cushions, brushes and 
combs, and the china and silver bureau-knacks of many birth- 
days and Cliristmases. 

On the wall hung a huge tinted photograph -of Samuel, 
which had captured a cold and aloof dignity, a scrubbed and 
dressed remoteness, which did not belong to him living. There 
was no twinkle in the picture of him, nor any of his inspective 
joyousness. The picture hung in a heavy gold frame, and to the 
consternation of all children its eyes followed a child about the 
room. 

On a wicker table beside Liza was the cage of Polly parrot. 
Tom had bought the parrot from a sailor. He was an old bird, 
reputed to be fifty years old, and he had lived a ribald life and 
acquired the vigorous speech of a ship’s fo’c’sle. Try as she 
would, Liza could not make him substitute psaliris for the pic- 
turesque vocabulary of his j'outh. 

Polly cocked his head sideways, inspecting Adam, and 
scratched his feathers at the base of his beak with a careful fore- 
claw. ‘Come off it, you bastard/ said Polly unemotionallj’. - 
¦ Liza frowned at Itim. ‘Polly/ she said sternly, ‘that’s not 
polite.’ 

- ‘Bloody bastard ! ’ Polly obser^'ed. 

Liza ignored the vulgarits'. She held out her tiny hand. 
,'Mr Trask/ she said, ‘Pm glad to see you. Sit down, won’t 
you?’ 

‘I was passing by, and I wanted to offer my condolences.’ 

‘We got your flowers.’ And she remembered, too, every bou- 

366 



quet after all this time. Adam had sent a fine pillow t)f ever- 
lastings. 

‘It must be hard to rearrange your life.’ 

Liza’s eyes brimmed over and she snapped her little mouth 
shut on her weakness. 

Adam said, ‘Maybe I shouldn’t bring up your hurt, but I 
miss him.’ 

Liza turned her head away. ‘How is ever3Thing down your 
way?’ she asked. 

‘Good this year. Lots of rainfall. The feed’s deep already.’ 

‘Tom wrote me,’ she said. 

‘Button up,’ said the parrot, and Liza scowled at him as she 
had at her growing children when they were mutinous. 

‘What brings you to Salinas, Air Trask?’ she asked. 

‘Why, some business.’ He sat down in a wicker chair and it 
cricked under his weight. ‘I’m thinking of moving up here. 
Thought it might be better for my boys. They get lonely on the 
ranch.’ 

‘We never got lonely on the ranch,’ she said harshly. 

‘I thought maybe the schools would be better here. My twins 
could have the advantages.’ 

‘My daughter Olive taught at Peach Tree and Pleyto and the 
Big Sur.’ Her tone made it clear that there were no better schools 
than those. Adam began to feel a warm admiration for her iron 
gallantry. 

¦ ‘Well, I was just thinking about it,’ he said. 

‘Children raised in the country do better.’ It was the law, and 
she could prove it by her own boys. Then she centred closely on 
him. ‘Are you looking for a house in Salinas?’ 

‘Well, yes, I guess I am.’ 

‘Go see my daughter Dessie,’ she said. ‘Dessie wants to move 
back to the ranch with Tom. She’s got a nice little house up the 
street next to Reynaud’s Bakery.’ 

¦‘I’ll certainly do that,’ said Adam. ‘I’ll go now. I’m glad to see 
you' doing so welL’ 

‘Thanl; you,’ she said. ‘I’m comfortable.’ Adam was moving' 
towards -the door when she said, ‘Mr Trask, do you ever see my 
son Tom?’ 

‘Well, no, I don’t. You see, I haven’t been off the ranch.’ 

‘I wish you would go and see him,’ she said quickly. ‘I think 
he’s lonely.’ She stopped as though horrified at this breaking 
over. 

‘I will. I surely will. Goodbye, ma’am 

367 



. As he closed the door he heard the -parrot sa>% 'Button up, 
you bloody bastard I’ and Liza, ‘Polly, if you don’t u-atch your 
language. I’ll thrash you.’ . - 

Adam let himself out of the house and walked up the evening 
¦ street towards Main. Next to Rejmaud’s French Bakery he saw 
Dessie’s house, set back in its little garden. The yard was so 
massed with tall privets that he couldn’t see much of the house. 
A neatly painted sign was screwed to the front gate. It read:; 
Dessie Hamilton, Dressmaker. 

The San Francisco Chop House_was on the corner of Main 
and Central and its windows were on botli streets. Adam went in 
' to get some dinner. Will Hamilton sat at the corner table, de- 
vouring a rib steak. ‘Come and sit with me,’ he called to Adam. 

, ‘Up on business?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Adam. ‘I went to pay a call on your mother.’ 

Will laid down his fork, ‘I’m just up here for an hour. I didn’t 
¦ go to see her because it gets her excited. And my sister Olive 
would tear the house do\vn getting a special dinner for me..,! just 
didn’t want to disturb them. Besides, I have to go right back, ¦ 
Order a rib steak. They’ve got good ones. How is Mother?’ 

. 'She’s got great courage,' said Adam. 'I find I adniire her 
more all the time.’ 

'That she has. How she kept her good sense with all of us and 
with my father, I don’t know.’ 

‘Rib steak, medium,’ said Adam to the waiter. 

‘Potatoes?’ 

^ ‘No - yes, french fried. Your mother is worried about Tom. Is 

¦ N, he all right?’ ’ ¦ ' 

/ •’ Will cut off the edging of fat from his steak and pushed it to 
the side of his plate. ‘She’s got reason to worry,’ he said. ‘Sorne- 
thing’s the matter with Tom. He’s moping around like a monu- 
ment.’ 

‘I guess he depended on Samuel.’ 

‘Too much,’ said Will. ‘Far too much. He can’t seem to come 
out of it. In some ways Tom is a great big baby.’ 

‘I'll go and see him. Your mother says Dessie is going to move 
back to the ranch.’ • ' 

Will laid his knife and fork down on the tablecloth and 
stared at Adam. ‘She can’t do it,’ he said. ‘I won't let her do 
it.’ 

‘Why not?’ 

Win covered up, ‘Well,’ he said, ‘she’s got a nice business 
here. Makes a good living. It would be a. shame to throw it 

368 



away.’ He picked up his knife and fork, cut off a piece of the 
fat, and put it in his mouth. 

'I’m catching the eight o’clock home,’ Adam said. 

‘So am I,’ said Will. He didn’t want to talk any more. 


CHAPTER 32 

I 

Dessie WAS the beloved of the family. MoUie the pretty 
kitten, Olive the strong-headed, Una with clouds on her head, 
all were loved, but Dessie was the warm-beloved. Hers was the 
twinkle and the laughter infectious as chickenpox, and hers the 
gaiety that coloured a day, and spread to people so that they 
carried it away TOth them. 

I can put it this way. Mrs Clarence Momson of 122 Church 
Street, Salinas, had three children and a husband who ran a dry 
goods store. On certain mornings, at breakfast, Agnes Morrison 
would say, ‘I’m going to Dessie Hamilton’s for a fitting after 
diimer.’ 

The children would be glad and would kick their copper toes 
against the table legs until cautioned. And Mr Morrison would 
rub his palms together and go to his store, hoping some driun- 
mer would come by that day. And any drummer who did come 
by was likely to get a good order. Maj'be the children and Mrs 
Morrison would forget why it was a good day with a promise on 
its tail. 

Mrs Morrison would go to the house next to Reynaud’s Bak- 
ery at two o’clock and she would stay until four. When she came 
out her eyes would be wet with tears and her nose red and 
streaming. Walking home, she w'ould dab her nose and wipe her 
eyes and laugh all over-again. Maybe all Dessie had done was to 
put several black pins in a cushion to make it look like tire Bap- 
tist minister, and then had the pin-cushion deliver a short dry 
sermon. Maybe she had recounted a meeting with Old Man 
Taylor, who bought old houses and moved them to a big meant 
lot he owned until he had so many it looked like a dry-land Sar- 
gasso Sea. Maybe she had read a poem from Ch.^tterbox wirh 
gestures. It didn’t matter. It was warm-funny, it was catch-np- 
funny. 

The Morrison children, coming home from S( 

369 



no aches, no carping, no headache. Their noise was not a scandal 
nor their dirt3' faces a care. And when the. giggles overcame 
them, why, their mother was giggling too. - 

Mr Morrison, coming home, would, tell of the day and get 
listened to, and he would try to re-tell the drummer’s stories - 
some of them at least. The, supper would be delicious— omelettes 
never fell and cakes rose to balloons of lightness, biscuits fluffed 
up, and no one could season a stew like Mrs Morrison. After 
supper, when the children had laughed themselves to sleep, like 
as not Mr, Morrison would touch Agnes on the shoulder in their 
old, old signal and they would go to bed and make love and, be 
verj' happy. 

The visit to Dessie might carry its charge into two days more 
before it petered out and the litde headaches came back and- 
business was not so good as last year. That’s how Dessie was and 
that’s what she could do.' She carried excitement in her arms 
just as Samuel had. She was the darling, she was the beloved of 
the family. 

Dessie was not beautiful. Perhaps she wasn’t even pretty, but 
she had the glow that makes men follow a woman in the hope of 
reflecting a little of it. You would have thought that in time she 
would have got over her first love affair and found another love, 
but she did not Come to think of it, none of the Hamiltons, 
with all fheir versatility, had any versatility in love. None of . 
them seemed capable of light or changeable love. 

Dessie did not simply throw up her hands and give up. It was 
much worse than that. She went right on doing and being what, 
she w’as - without the glow. The people who loved her ached for 
her, seeing her try, and they got to trying for her. 

Dessie’s friends were good and loyal but they w'ere human, 
and humans love to feel good and they hate to feel bad. In time 
the Mrs Morrisons found unassailable reasons for not going to • 
the little house by the bakery. They weren’t disloyal. They didn’t 
want to be sad as much as Aey wanted to be happy. It is easi' to 
find a logical and virtuous reason for not doing what you don’t 
want to do. 

Dcssie’s business began to fall off. And the women who had 
thought they wanted dresses never realized that what they had 
wanted was happiness. Times were changing and the ready-made 
drbss-was becoming popular. It was no longer a disgrace to wear 
one. If Mr Morrison was stocking ready-mades, it tvas only 
reasonable that Agnes Morrison should be seen in them. 

The family was worried about Dessie, but what could you do 

370 


when she would not admit thete was anything wrong with her? 
She did admit to pains in her side, quite fierce, but they lasted 
only a little while and came only at intervals. 

Then Samuel died and the world shattered like a dish. His 
sons and daughters and friends groped about among the pieces, 
trying to put some kind of world together again. 

Dessie decided to sell her business and go back to the ranch to 
live with Tom. She hadn’t much of any business to sell out. 
Liza knew about it, and Olive, and Dessie had written to Tom. 
But Will, sitting scowling at the table in the San Francisco Chop 
House, had not been told. Will frothed inwardly and finally he 
balled up his napkin and got up. T forgot something,’ he said to 
Adam. ‘I’ll see you on the train.’ 

He walked the half-block to Dessie’s house and went through 
the high-grown garden and rang Dessie’s bell. 

She was having her dinner alone, and she came to the door 
with her napkin in her hand. ‘Why, hello. Will,’ she said and 
put up her pink cheek for him to Wss. ‘^^en did you get in 
town?’ 

‘Business,’ he said. ‘Just here between trains. I want to talk to 
you,’ 

She led him back to her kitchen and dining-room combined, 
a warm little room papered with flowers. Automatically she 
poured a cup of coffee and placed it for him and put the sugar 
bowl and the cream pitcher in front of it. 

‘Have you seen Mother?’ she asked. 

‘I’m just here over trains,’ he said gruffly. ‘Dessie, is it true 
that you want to go back to the ranch?’ 

‘I was thinking of it.’ 

‘I don’t want you to go.’ 

She smiled uncertainly. ‘Why not? What’s rvrong with that? 
Tom’s lonely down there.’ 

‘You’ve got a nice business here,’ he said. 

‘I haven’t any business here,’ she replied. ‘I thought you knew 
that.’ 

‘I don’t want you to go,’ he repeated sullenly. 

Her smile was wistful and she tried her best to put a little 
mockery in her manner. ‘My big brother is masterful. TeU Dessie 
why not.’ ‘ 

‘It’s too lonely down there.’ . 

‘It won’t be lonely with the tw'o of us-’ 

WHl pulled at his lips angrily. He blurted, ‘Tom’s not himself 
-You shouldn’t be alone with him.’ 

371 



‘Isn’t he well? Does he need help?’ 

Will said, ‘I didn’t want to. tell you -I don’t think Tom’s ever 
got over - the death. He’s strange.’ 

She smiled affectionately. “Will, 3'ou’ve always thought he was 
strange. You tliought he was strange when he didn’t like busi- 
ness.’ ' - ^ 

‘That’s different. But now he’s broody. He doesn’t talk. He 
goes walking alone in the hills at night. I tvent to see him and 
-he’s been writing poetry -pages of it all over the table.’ 

‘Didn’t you ever write poetry. Will?’ 

‘I did not.’ 

*I have,’’ said Dessie. ‘Pages and pages of it all over the 
table.’ • - 

‘I don’t want you to go.’ 

‘Let me decide,’ she said softly. T’ve lost something. I want to 
try to find it again.’ 

‘You’re talking foolish.’ 

She came round the table and put her arms around his neck. 
‘Dear brother,' she said, ‘please let me decide.’ 

He went angrily out of the house and bar^y caught his train. 

II 

Tom met Dessie at the King City station. She saw him out of 
the train window, scanning every coach for her. He was burn- 
ished, his face sltaved so close that its darkness had a shine like 
polished wood. His red moustache was clipped. He wore a new 
Stetson hat with a fiat crown, a tan Norfolk jacket with a belt 
buckle of mother-of-pearl. His shoes glinted in the noonday 
light so that it was sure he had gone over them with his hand-, 
kerchief just before the train arrived. His hard collar stood up 
against his strong red neck, and he wore a pale blue knitted tie 
with a horseshoe tie-piii. He tried to conceal his excitement by 
clasping his rough browm hands in front of him. 

Dessie waved wildly out of the window, crying, ‘Here I am, 
Tom, here I am!’ though she knew he couldn’t hear her over 
the grinding wheels of the train as the coach slid past him. She 
climbed down the steps and saw him look frantically about in 
the wrong direction. She smiled and tralked up behind him. 

, ‘I beg your pardon, stranger,’ she said quietly. ‘Is there a Mr 
Tom Hamilton here?’ 

He spun round and he squealed with pleasure and picked her 
up in a bear hug and danced her around. He held her off tlie, 

372 


ground with one arm and spanked her bottom with his free 
hand. He nuzzled her cheek with his harsh moustache. Then he 
held her back by the shoulders and looked at her. Both of them 
threw back their heads and howled with laughter. 

The station agent leaned out of his window and rested his 
elbows, protected with black false sleeves, on the sill. He said 
over his shoulder to the telegrapher, ‘Those Hamiltons! Just 
look at them ! ’ 

Tom and Dessie, fingertips touching, were doing a courtly 
heel-and-toe while he sang Doodle-doodle-doo and Dessie sang 
Deedle-deedle-dee, and then they embraced again. 

Tom looked down at her. ‘Aren’t you Dessie Hamilton? I 
seem to remember you. But you’ve changed. Where are your 
pigtails?’ 

It took him quite a fumbling time to get her luggage checks, 
to lose them in his pockets, to find them and pick up the wrong 
pieces. At last he had her baskets piled in the back of the buck- 
board. The two bay horses pawed.the hard ground and threw up 
their heads so that the shined pole jumped and the double-trees 
squeaked. The harness was polished and the horse brasses glit- 
tered like gold. There was a red bow tied half way up the buggy 
whip and red ribbons were braided into the horses’ manes and 
tails. 

Tom helped Dessie into the seat and pretended to peek coyly 
at her ankle. Then he snapped up the check reins and mifastened 
the leather tie reins from the bits. He unwrapped the lines from 
the whip stock, and the horses turned so sharply that the wheel 
screamed against the guard. 

Tom said, ‘Would you care to make a tour of King City? It’s 
a lovely town.’ 

‘No,’ she said. ‘I think I remember it.’ He turned left and 
¦ headed south and lifted the horses to a fine swinging trot, 

Dessie said, ‘Where’s Will?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ he answered gruffly. 

“Did he talk to you?’ 

‘Yes. He said you shouldn’t come.’ 

‘He told me the same thing,’ said Dessie. ‘He got George to 
write to me too.’ 

‘Why shouldn’t you come if you want to?’ Tom raged. 
‘What’s Will got to do with it?’ ^ 

She touched his arm. ‘He thinks you’re crazy. Says you re 
writing poetry.’ 

Tom’s face darkened. ‘He must have gone into the_house 

373 


when I'wasn’t there. Wliat’s he want anyway? He had no right 
to look at my papers.’ 

‘Gently, gently,’ said Bessie. ‘Will’s your brother. Don’t for- 
get tliat.’ , 

.. ‘How would he like me to go through his papers?’ Tom de- 
manded. . 

‘He wouldn’t let you,’ Bessie said d^dy. 'They’d be locked in 
the safe. Now lef s not spoil the day with anger.’ 

‘All right,’ he said. ‘God knows all right! But he makes me 
•mad. If I don’t want to live his kind of life I’m crazy -just 
crazy.!’ 

Bessie changed the subject, forced the change. ‘You know, I 
had quite a time at the last,’ .she said. ‘Mother wanted to come. 
Have.you ever seen Mother cry, Tom?’ 

‘No, not that I can remember. No, she’s not a crier.’ 

‘Well, she cried. Not much, but a lot for her -a choke and two 
sniffles and a wiped nose and polished her glasses and snapped 
shut like a watch.’ 

Tom said, ‘Oh, Lord, Bessie, it’s good to have you back! It’s 
good. Makes me fed I’m well from a sickness.’ 

The horses spanked along the county road. Tom said, ‘Adam 
Trask has bought a Ford. Or maybe I should say Will sold him 
a Ford.’ 

‘I didn’t know about the Ford,’ said Bessie. ‘He’s buying my 
house. Giving me a very good price for it.’ She laughed. ‘I put 
a very high price on the house. I was going to come down dur- 
ing negotiations. Mr Trask accepted the first price. It put me in 
a fix.’ 

‘What did you do, Bessie?’ ’ . 

‘Well, I had to tell him about the high price and that I had 
planned to be argued dowm. He didn’t seem to care either way.’ 

Tom said, ‘Let me beg you never to tell that story to Will. 
He’d have you locked up.’ 

‘But the house wasn’t worth what I asked!’ - 

‘I repeat what I said about Will. What’s Adam want with your 
house?’ 

‘He’s going to move there. Wants the twins to go to school in 
Salinas.’ ' 

‘What’ll he do with his ranch?’ 

‘I don’t know. He didn’t say.’ 

Tom said, ‘I wonder what rvould have happened if Father’d 
got hold of a ranch like that instead of Old Dry and Dusty.’ 

‘It isn’t such a bad place.’ 


V1& 



‘Fine for everything except making a living.’ 

Dessie said earnestly, ‘Have you ever knov/n any family that 
had more fun?’ 

‘No, I don’t. But that was the family, not the land.’ 

‘Tom, remember when you took Jenny and Belle Williams to 
the Peach Tree dance on the sofa?’ 

‘Mother never let me forget it. Say, wouldn’t it be good to ask 
Jenny and Belle down for a visit?’ 

‘They’d come too,’ Dessie said. ‘Let’s do it.’ 

When they turned off the county road she said, ‘Somehow I 
remember it differently.’ 

‘Drier?’ 

‘I guess that’s it. Tom, there’s so much grass.’ 

‘I’m getting twenty head of stock to eat it.’ 

‘You must be rich.’ 

‘No, and the good year will break the price of beef. I wonder 
what Will would do. He’s a scarcity man. He told me. He said, 
“Always deal in scarcities,” Will’s smart.’ 

The rutty road had not changed except that the ruts were 
deeper and the round stones stuck up higher. 

Dessie said, ‘What’s the card on that mesquite bush?’ She 
picked it off as they drove by, and it said, ‘Welcome Home’. 

‘Tom, you did it ! ’ 

‘I did not. Someone’s been here.’ 

Every fifty yards there was another card sticking on a bush, 
or hanging from the branches of a madrone, or tacked to the 
trunli of a buckeye, and all of them said, ‘Welcome Home’. 
Dessie squealed with delight over each one. 

They topped the rise above the little valley of the old Hamil- 
ton place and Tom puUed up to let her enjoy the view. On the 
hill across the valley, spelled out in whitewashed stones, were the 
huge words, ‘Welcome Home, Dessie’. She put her head against 
his lapel and laughed and cried at the same time. 

, Tom looked sternly ahead of him. ‘Now who could have done 
that?’ he said. ‘A man can’t leave the place any more.’ 

In the dawn Dessie was awakened by the chill of pain that 
came to her at inter\'als. It was a rustle and a threat of pain; it 
scampered up from her side and across her abdomen; a nibbling 
pinch and tlien a little grab and then a hard catch and finally a 
fierce grip as though a huge hand had \vrenched her. When that 
relaxed she felt a soreness like a bruise. It didn’t last very long, 
but while it went on the outside world was blotted out, and she 
seemed to be listening to the struggle in her body. 

375 



• When only the soreness remained she saw how the dawn had 
come silver to the windows. She smelled die good morning wind 
rippling the curtains,, bringing in the odour of grass and roots 
and damp earth. After that sounds joined the parade of percep- 
tion - sparrows haggled OTong themselves, a bawling cow monc^ 
tonously berating a punching hungry calf, a blue jay’s squawk of 
false excitement, the sharp warning of a cock quail on guard,, 
and. the answering whisper of the hen quail soniewhere near in 
the tall grass. The chicken yard boiled with excitement over an 
egg, and a big lady Rhode Island Red, who weight four 
pounds, hypocritically prorated the horror of being lustfully 
pinned to the ground by, a scrawny wreck of a- rooster she could 
have blasted with one blow of her wing. 

The cooing of pigeons brought memory into the procession. 
Dessie' remembered how her father had said, sitting at the head 
of the table, T told Rabbit I was going to raise some pigeons and 
-do you know? -he said, “No white pigeons.” “Why not 
white?” I asked him, and he said, “They’re the rare worst of 
bad luck. You take a flight of white pigeons and they’ll bring sad-, 
ness and death. Get grey ones.” “I like white ones.” “Get grey 
ones,” he told me. And as the sky covers me. I’ll get white ones.’ 

And Liza said patiently, ‘Why do you be for ever testing, 
Samuel? Grey ones taste just as good and they’re bigger.’ 

‘I’ll let no flimsy fairj'-tale push me,’ Samuel said. 

And Liza said with her dreadful simplicity, ‘You’re already 
pushed by yom own contentiousness. You’re a mule of conten- 
tion, a very mule! ’ 

¦, ‘Someone’s got to do these things,’ he said sullenly. ‘Else Fate 

- '’I not ever get nose-thumbed and mankind would still be 
clinging to the top branches of a tree.’ 

And of course he got white pigeons and waited truculently 
for sadness and death until he’d proved his point. And here were 
the great-great-grand squabs cooing in the morning and rising 
to fly like a whirling white scarf around the wagon shed. 

As Dessie remembered, she heard the words and the house 
around her grew peopled. Sadness and death, she thought, and 
death and sadness, and it wrenched in her stomach against the 
soreness.; You just have to wait around long enough and it will 
come. : 

. She heard the air whooshing into the big bellows in the forge 
and the practice tap for range of hammer on anvil. She heard 
Liza open the oven door and the thump of a kneaded loaf on the 
floury board. Then Joe wandered about, looking in unlikely 

376 , 



places for his shoes, and at last found them where he had left 
them under the bed. 

She heard MoUie’s sweet high voice in the kitchen, reading a 
morning text from the Bible, and Una’s full cold throaty correc- 
tion. 

And Tom had cut Mollie’s tongue with his pocket-knife and 
died in his heart when he realized his courage. 

'Oh, dear Tom,’ she said, and her lips moved. 

Tom’s cowardice was as huge as his courage, as it must be in 
great men. His violence balanced his tenderness, and himself 
was a pitted battlefield of his own forces. He was confused now, 
but Dessie could hold his bit and point him, the way a handler 
points a thoroughbred at the barrier to show his breeding and 
his form. 

Dessie lay part in pain and a part of her dangled still in sleep 
while the morning brightened against the window. She remem- 
bered that Mollie was going to lead the Grand March at the 
Fourth of July picnic tvith no less than Harry Forbes, State 
Senator. And Dessie had not finished putting the braid on Mol- 
lie’s dress. She struggled to get up. There was so much braid, 
and here she lay drowsing. 

She cried, ‘I’ll get it done, Mollie. It will be ready.’ 

She got up from her bed and threw her robe around her and 
walked barefoot through the house crowded with Hamiltons. In 
the hall they were gone to the bedrooms. In the bedrooms, with 
the beds neat-made, they were all in the kitchen, and in the kit- 
chen -they dispersed and were gone. Sadness and death. The 
wave receded and left her in dry awakeness. 

The house was . clean, scrubbed and immaculate, curtains 
washed, windows pohshed, but all as a man does it -the ironed 
curtains did not hang quite straight and there were streaks on 
the windows and a square showed on the table when a book was 
moved. 

The stove was warming, with orange light showing around 
the lids and the soft thunder of draughty flame leaping past the 
open damper. The kitchen clock flashed its pendulum behind its 
glass skirt, and it ticked like a little wooden hammer striking on 
an empty wooden box. 

From outside came a whistle as wild and raucous as a reed 
and pitched high and strange. The whistling scattered a savage 
melody. Then Tom’s steps sounded on the porch, and he came 
in with an armload of oakvvood so high he could not see over it. 
He cascaded the wood into the wood-box. 

377 


“You’re up/ he said. ‘That was to wake you if you were still 
sleeping/ His face was lighted with joy. ‘This is a morning light 
as down and no time to be slugging/ 

‘You sound like j’our father/ Bessie said, and she laughed 
.with him. 

His joy hardened to fierceness. ‘Yes/ he said loudly. ‘And we’ll 
have that time again, right here. I’ve been dragging myself in 
misery like a spine-broken snake. No wonder Will thought I was 
cracked. But now you’re back, and I’ll show you. I’ll breatlte life 
into life again. Do you hear? This house is going to be alive.’ 

‘I’m glad I came/ she said, and she thought in desolation how 
brittle he was now and how easy to shatter, and how she would 
have to protect liim. 

r ¦' ‘You must have worked day and m'ght to get the house so 
clean,’ she said. 

‘Nothing/ said Tom. ‘A little twist with the fingers.’ 

‘I know that twist, but it was the bucket and mop and on 
your knees -imlcss you’ve invented some way to do it by 
chicken power or the harnessed wind.’ 

‘Invented - nov/ that’s why I have no time. I’ve invented a 
little slot 'that lets a necktie slip-freely in a stiff collar/ 

‘You don’t wear stiff collars.’ 

‘I did yesterday. That’s when I invented it. And chickens - 
I’m going to raise millions of them - little houses all over the 
ranch and a ring on the roof to dip them in a whitewashed tank. 
And the eggs will come through on a little conveyor belt -here! 
I’ll draw it.’ 

‘I want to draw some breakfast/ Bessie said. ‘What’s the shape 
'of a fried egg? How would you colour the fat and lean of a 
’¦¦ip of bacon?’ 

‘You’ll have it/ he cried, and he opened the stove lid and 
assaulted the fire with the stove lifter until the hairs on his hand 
curled and charred. He pitched wood in and started his liigh 
v/histling. 

Bessie said, ‘You sound like some goat-foot with a wheat flute 
onli hill in Greece.’ 

‘What do j’ou think I am?’ he shouted. 

^ Bessie thought miserably. If his is real, why can’t my heart be 
light? Why can’t I climb out of my grey ragbag? I , will, she 
screeched inside herself. If he can - 1 will. 

She said, ‘Tom 1 ’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘I want a purple egg.’ 


378 



CHAPTER 33 


I 

The green lasted on the hills far into June before the grass 
turned yellow. The heads of the wild oats were so heavy with 
seed that they himg over on their stalks. The little springs 
trickled on late in the summer. The range cattle staggered under 
their fat and their hides shone with health. It was a year when 
the people of the Salinas Valley forgot the dry years. Farmers 
bought more land than they could afford and figured their 
profits on the ’covers of their cheque-books. 

Tom Hamilton laboured like a giant, not only with his 
strong arms and rough hands but also with his heart and spirit. 
The anvil rang in the forge again. He painted the old house 
white and whitewashed the sheds. He went to King City and 
studied a flush toilet and then built one of craftily bent tin and 
carved wood. Because the' water came so slowly from the spring, 
he put a redwood tank beside the house and pumped the water 
up to it with a hand-made windmill so cleverly made that it 
turned in the slightest wind. And he made metal and wood 
models of two ideas to be sent to the patent ofBce in the fall. 

That was not all - he laboured with humour and good spirits. 
Dessie had to rise very early to get in her hand at the house- 
work before Tom had it all done. She watched his great red hap- 
piness, and it was not light as Samuel’s happiness was light. It 
did not rise out of his roots and come floating up. He was manu- 
facturing happiness as cleverly as he knew how, moulding it and 
shaping it. 

D^sie, who had more friends than anyone in the whole valley, 
had no confidants. When her trouble had come upon her she 
had not talked about it. And the pains were a secret in hersdf. 

When Tom found her rigid and tight from the grabbing pain 
and cried in alarm, ‘Dessie, what’s the matter?’ she controlled 
her face and said, ‘A little crick, that’s all. Just a little crick. I’m 
all right now.’ And in a moment they were laughing. 

They laughed a great deal, as though to reassure themselves. 
Only when Dessie went to her bed did her loss fall on her, bleak 
and imenduiable. And Tom lay in the dark of his room, puzzled 
as a child. He could hear his heart beating and rasping a little in 
its beat. His mind fell away from thought and clung for^fety 
to little plans, designs, machines. 

379 



Sometimes in the summer evenings they walked up the hill to 
watch the' afterglow clinging to the tops of tlie western moun- 
tains and to feel the breeze drawn into the valley by the rising 
day-heated air. Usually they stood silently for a while and 
breathed in peacefulness. Since both w^e shy they never talked 
about themselves. Neither knew about the other at all. 

It was startling to both of them when Dessie said orie evening 
on the hill, ‘Tom, why don’t you get married?’ 

He looked quickly at her and away. He said, ‘Who’d have 
me?’ ¦ ; . , 

‘Is that a joke or do you really mean it?’ 

•Who’d have me?’ he said again. ‘Who’d want a thing like 
me?’ 

.'‘It sounds to me as' though you really mean it.’ Then she 
violated their unstated code. ‘Have you been in love with some- 
one?’ ' ¦ . . . 

‘No,’ he said shortly. 

. ‘I wish I knew,’ she said as though he had not answered. . 

^Tom did not speak again as they walked down the hilL But 
on the porch he said suddenly, ‘You’re lonely here. You don’t 
want to stay.’ He waited for a moment. ‘Answer me. Isn’t that 
true?’ 

‘I want to stay here more than I want to stay anyplace else.’ , 
She asked, ‘Do you ever go to women?’ 

‘Yes,’ he said. 

‘Is it any good to you?’ , 

‘Not much.’ 

•>. ‘What are you going to do?’ 
i ‘I don’t know,’ ' - , 

In silence they went back to the house. Tom lighted the lamp 
in the old living-room. The horsehair sofa he had rebuilt raised 
its goose-neck against the wall, and the green carpet had tracks 
worn light between the doors. 

Tom sat down by the round centre table. Dessie sat on the 
sofa, and she could see that he was still embarrassed from his 
last admission. She thought. How pure he is, how unfit for a 
world that even she knew more about than he did. A dragon 
killer, he was, a rescuer of damsels, and his small sins seemed so 
great to him that he felt unfit and unseemly. She wished her 
father were here. Her father had felt greatness in Tom. Perhaps 
he would Icnow now how to release it out of its darkness and let 
it fly free. 

She took another tack to see whether she, could raise some 

380 ¦ . . 


spark in him. ‘As long as we’re talking about ourselves, have 3'ou 
ever thought that our whole world is the valley and a few trips 
to San Francisco, and have you ever been farther south than San 
Luis Obispo? I never have.’ 

‘Neither have I,’ said Tom. 

‘Well, isn’t that silly?’ 

‘Lots of people haven’t,’ he said. 

‘But it’s not law. We could go to Paris and to PvOme or to 
Jerusalem. I would dearly love to see the Colosseu.m.’ 

He watched her suspiciouslj’, expecting some kind of j'o;<e. 
‘How could v/e?’ he asked. ‘That takes a lot of money/ 

‘I don’t think it does,’ she said. ‘We wouldn’t have to stay in 
fancy places. We could take the cheapest boats and the lovrest 
class. That’s how our father came here from Ireland. And v/e 
could go to Ireland.’ 

Still he watched her, but a burning was beginiiing in hit eyes. 

Dessie went on, ‘We could take a year for wiorin save every 
peimy. I can get some sewing to do in King City. Will would 
help us. And next summer you could sell all the stock and we 
could go. There’s no law forbids ft.’ 

Tom got up and went outside. He looked at the s nntnter stam- 
at blue Venus and red Mars. His hands hexed at hh sides, cioted 
to fists and opened. Then he turned and went back into dte 
house. Dessie had not moved. 

‘Do 3^ou want to go, Dessie?’ 

‘More than anything in the world.’ 

‘Then we vrill go ! ’ 

‘Do you want to go? ’ 

‘More than anything in the world,’ he sam. ana tnen, ‘Egypt — 
have you given a thought to Egypte ’ 

‘Athens/ she said. 

‘Constantinople ! ’ 



When Bessie got ,up in the morning Tom was already at his 
drawing-board, beating his forehead with his fist and growling 
to himself. Bessie looked over. Ids shoulder. ‘Is it the acorn 
machine?’ • 

‘It should be easy,' he said., ‘But how to get out the sticks and 

¦ rocks?’ ¦ • ¦ ; ¦ 

‘I know, you’re the inventor, but I invented the greatest acorn 
picker in the world and it’s ready to go.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Children,’ she said. ‘Those restless little hands.’ 

‘They wouldn’t do it, not even for pay.’ 

‘They would for prizes. A prize for everyone and a big prize 
for the winner -maybe a hundred-dollar prize. They’d sweep 
the valley clean. Will you let me try?’ 

¦ -He scratched his head. ‘Why not?’ he said. ‘But how would 
you collect the acorns?’ 

‘The children will bring them in,’ said Bessie. ‘Just Jet me take 
care of it. I hope you have plenty of storage space.’ . , . 

‘It would be exploiting the young, wouldn’t it?’ , 

‘Certainly it would,’ Bessie agreed. ‘When I had my shop I 
exploited the girls who wanted to learn to sew -and they ex- 
ploited me. I think I will call this The Great Monterey County 
Acorn Contest. And I won’t let everyone in. Maybe bicycles for 
prizes -wouldn’t you pick up acorns in hope of a bicycle, 
Tom?' 

‘Sure I would,’ he said. ‘But couldn’t we pay them too?’ 

‘Not with money,’ Bessie said. ‘That would reduce it to 
labour, and they will not labour if they can help it. Nor will I.’ 

Tom leaned back from his board and laughed. ‘Nor will I,’ he 
’ said. ‘All right, you are in charge of acoms and I am in charge 
of pigs.’ 

Bessie said, ‘Tom, wouldn’t it be ridiculous if we made 
money, we of all people?’ 

'But jTDU made money in Salinas,’ he said. 

‘Some — not much. But oh, I was rich in promises. If the bills 
had ever been paid we wouldn’t need pigs. We could go to Paris 
tomorrow.’ 

_ Tm going to drive in and talk to Will,’ said Tom. He pushed 
his chair back from the drawing-board. ‘Want to. come with 
¦ me?’ 

No, I’ll stay and make my plans. Tomorrow. I start The 
Great Acom Contest.’ : 


382 


II 


On the ride back to the ranch in the late afternoon Tom was 
depressed and sad. As always. Will had managed to chew up and 
spit out his enthusiasm; Will had pulled his lip, rubbed his eye- 
brows, scratched his nose, cleaned his glasses, and made a majori. 
operation of cutting and lighting a cigar. The pig proposition 
was full of holes, and Will was able to put his finger in the 
holes. 

The Acorn Contest wouldn’t work, although he was not ex- 
plicit about why it wouldn’t. The whole thing was shalcy, par- 
ticularly in these times. The very best Will was able to do was to 
think about it. 

At one time during the talk Tom had thought to tell Will 
about Europe, but a quick instinct stopped him. The idea of 
traipsing aroimd Europe, unless, of coiurse, you were retired and 
had your capital out in good securities, would be to Will a crazi- 
ness that would make the pig plan a marvel of business acumen. 
Tom did not tell him, and he left Will to 'think it over’, know- 
ing that the verdict would be against the pigs and the acorns. 

Poor Tom did not know and could not learn that dissembling 
successfully is one of the creative joys of a business man. To in- 
dicate enthusiasm was to be idiotic. And WiU really did mean to 
think it over. Parts of the plan fascinated him. Tom had 
stumbled on a very interesting thing. If you could buy shoats on 
credit, fatten them on food that cost next to nothing, sell them, 
pay off your loan, and take your profit, you would really have 
done something. Will would not rob his brother. He would cut 
him in on the profits, but Tom was a dreamer and could not be 
trusted with a good sound plan. Tom, for instance, didn’t even 
know the price of pork and its probable trend. If it worked out. 
Will could be depended on to give Tom a very substantial pre- 
sent -maybe even a Ford. And how about a Ford as first and 
only prize for acorns? Everybody in the whole valley would pick 
acorns. 

Driving up the Hamilton road, Tom wondered how to break 
it to Dessie that their plan was no good. The best way would be 
to have another plan to substitute for it. How could they make 
enough money in one year to go to Europe? And suddenly he 
realized that he didn’t luiow how much they’d need. He didn’t 
know the price of a steamship ticket. They might spend the 
evening figuring. 

- He half expected Dessie to run out of the house when he drove 

383 


up. He would put on his best face and tell a joke. But Dessie 
didn’t run out. Maybe taking a nap, he thought. He watered the 
horses and stabled them and pitched hay into the manger. . ^ 

Dessie was lying on' the goose-neck sofa when Tom came in, 
"Taking a nap?’ he asked,- and then he saw the colotir of hes 
face! ‘Dessie,’ -he cried, ‘whafs the matter?’ 

She rallied herself against • pain. ‘Just a stomach-ache,’ she 
said. ‘A pretty severe one.’ 

‘Oh,’ said Tom. ‘You scared me. I can fix up a stomach-ache.' 
He went to the kitchen and brought back a glass of pearly liquid 
He handed it to her. 

‘What is it, Tom?’ 

‘Good old-fashioned salts. It may gripe you a little but idll dc 
the job.’ 

She drank it obediently and made a face. ‘I rraemb^ tha' 
taste,’ she said. ‘Mother’s remedy in green apple season.’ 

‘Now lie still,’ Tom said. ‘I’ll rusde up some dinner.’ • 

She could hear him knocking about in the kitchen. The pair 
roared through her body. And on top of the pain there was fear 
She could feel the medicine burn down to her storhach. After i 
while she dragged herself to the netv home-made flush toilet anc 
tried to vomit the salts. The perspiration ran from her foreheac 
and blinded her. When she tried to straighten up, the muscle 
over her stomach were set and she could not break free. 

Later Tom brought her some scrambled eggs; She shook he 
head slowly. ‘I can’t,’ she said, smiling. ‘I think I’ll just go t( 
bed.’ 

‘The salts should work pretty soon,’ Tom assured her. ‘The: 
you’ll be all right.’ He helped her to bed. ‘What do you supposi 
you ate to cause it?’ , . ¦ 

Dessie lay in her bedroom and her will battled the pain 
About ten o’clock in the evening her will began to lose its fighi 
She called, ‘Tom! Tom!’ He opened the door. He had th 
. World Almanac in his hand. ‘Tom,’ she said, ‘I’m sorry. Bu 
I’m awfully sick, Tom. I’m terribly sick.’ >. 

He sat down on’ the edge of her bed in the half -darkness. ‘Ar 
the gripes bad?’ 

‘Yes, awful?’ \ ' 

‘Can you go to the toilet now?’ 

‘No, not now.’ 

‘I’ll bring a lamp and sit with you,’ he said. ‘Maybe vou ca; 
get some sleep. It’ll be gone in the morning. The salts’ will d 
the job.’ 


384 


Her will took hold again and she lay still while Tom read bits 
out of the Almanac to soothe her. He stopped reading when he 
thought she was sleeping, and he dozed in his chair beside the 
lamp. 

A thin scream awakened him. He stepped beside the struggling 
bedclothes. Dessie’s eyes were milky and crazy, like those of a 
maddened horse. Her mouth corners erupted thick bubbles and 
her face was on fire. Tom put his hand under the cover and felt 
muscles knotted like iron. And then her struggle stopped and 
her head fell back and the light glinted on her half-closed eyes. 

Tom put only a bridle on the horse and flung himself on 
bareback. He groped and ripped out his belt to beat the fright- 
ened horse to an awkward run over the stony, rutted wheel track. 

The Duncans, asleep upstairs in the two-storey house on the 
county road, didn’t hear the banging on their door, but they 
heard the bang and ripping sound as their front door came off, 
carrying lock and hinges with it. By the time Red Duncan got 
downstairs with a shotgun Tom was screaming into the wall 
telephone at the King City central. ‘Dr Tilson! Get him! I 
don’t care. Get him I Get him, goddam it.’ Red Duncan sleepily 
had the gun on him. 

Dr Tilson said, ‘Yes! Yes - yes, I hear. You’re Tom Hamil- 
ton. What’s the matter with her? Is her stomach hard? What 
did you do? Salts ! You goddam fool I ’ 

Then the doctor controlled his anger. ‘Tom,’ he said, ‘Tom, 
boyj Pifll yourself together. Go back and lay cold cloths -cold 
as you can get them. I don’t suppose you have any ice. Well, 
keep changing the cloths. I’ll be out as fast as I can. Do you hear 
me? Tom, do you hear me?’ 

He hung the receiver up and dressed. In angry weariness he 
opened the waU cabinet and collected scalpels and clamps, 
sponges and tubes of sutures, to put in his bag. He shook his 
gasoline pressure lantern to make sure it was full and arranged 
ether can and mask beside it on his bureau. His wife in boudoir 
cap and nightgown looked in. Dr Tilson said, ‘I’m walking oyer 
to the garage. Call Will Hamilton. Tell him I want him to drive 
me to his father’s place. If he argues tell him his sister is - 
dying.’ 


Ill 


Tom came riding back to the ranch a week after Dessie’s funeral, 
riding high and prim, his shoulders straight and chin in, like e 


guardsman on parade. Tom had done 'ever3rthing slowly, per- 
fectly. His horse was curried and brushed, and his Stetson hat 
was square on his head. Not even Samuel could have held him- 
self in more dignity than Tom as he rode back to the old 
house. A hawk driving down on a chicken with doubled fists did 
not make him turn his head. 

At the bam he dismounted, watered his horse, held him a 
moment at the door, haltered him, and put rolled barley in the 
box beside the manger. He took off the saddle and turned the 
blanket inside out to dry. Then the barley was finished and he 
led the bay horse out and turned him free to graze on every 
unfcnced inch of the world. 

In the house the furniture, chairs, and stove seemed to shrink 
back and away from him in distaste. A stool avoided him as he 
went to the living-room. His matches were soft and damp, and 
with a feeling of apology he went to the kitchen for more. The 
lamp in the living-room was fair and lonely. Tom’s first match 
flame ran quickly roimd the Rochester wick and then stood up 
• a full inch of yellow flame. 

Tom sat down in the evening and looked around. His 05x5 
avoided the horsehair sofa. A slight noise of mice in the kitchen 
made him turn, and he saw his shadow on the wall and his hat 
was on. He removed it and laid it on the table beside him. 

He thought dawdling, protective thoughts, sitting under the 
lamp, but he knew that pretty soon his name would be called and 
he would have to go up before the bench tvith himself as judge 
and his own crimes as jurors. 

And his name was called, shrilly in his ears. His mind walked 
in to face the accusers : Vanity, which charged him with being 
ill dressed and dirty and vulgar; and Lust, slipping him the 
money for his whoring; Dishonesty, to make him pretend to 
talent and thought he did not have; Laziness and Gluttony arm- 
in-arm. Tom felt comforted by these because they screened the 
great Grey One in the back seat, waiting - the grey and dreadftil 
crime. He dredged up lesser things, used small sins almost like 
virtues to save himself. There were Covetousness of "Will's 
money. Treason towards his mother's God. Theft of time and 
hope, sick Rejection of love. 

Samuel spoke sofdy but his voice filled the room. ‘Be good, be 
pure, be great, Tom Hamilton.’ 

Tom ignored his father. He said, ‘I’m busy greeting my 
friends,’ and he nodded to Discourtesy and Ugliness and Un- 
filial Conduct and Unkept Fingernails, Then he started with 

386 


Vanity again. The Grey One shouldered up in front. It was too 
late to stall with baby sins. This Grey One was Murder. 

Tom’s hand felt the chill of the glass and saw the pearly 
liquid with the dissolving crystals still turning over and lucent 
bubbles rising, and he repeated aloud in the empty, empty room, 
‘This will do the job. Just wait till morning. You’ll feel fine 
then.’ That’s how it had sounded, exactly how, and the walls 
and chairs and the lamp had all heard it and they could prove 
it. There was no place in the whole world for Tom Hamilton to 
live. But it wasn’t for lack of trying. He shufided possibilities 
like cards. London? No! Egypt -pyramids in Egypt and the 
Sphinx? No! Paris? No! Now vrait - they do all your sins lots 
better there. No ! Well, stand aside and maybe we’ll come back 
to you. Bethlehem? Dear God, no! It would be lonely there for 
a stranger. 

And here interpolated - it’s so hard to remember how you die 
or when. An eyebrow raised or a whisper -they may be it; or a 
night mottled with splashed light until powder-driven lead finds 
your secret and lets out the fluid in you. 

Now this is true, Tom Hamilton was dead and he had only 
to do a few decent things to make it final. 

The sofa cricked in criticism, and Tom looked at it and at 
the smoking lamp to which the sofa referred. ‘Thank you,’ Tom 
said to the sofa. ‘I hadn’t noticed it,’ and he turned down the 
wick until the smoking stopped. 

His mind dozed. Murder slapped him aware again. Now Red 
Tom, Gim Tom, was too tired to kill himself. That takes some 
doing, with maybe pain and maybe hell. 

' He remembered that his mother had a strong distaste for sui- 
cide, feeling that it combined three things of which she strongly 
disapproved -bad manners, cowardice, and sin. It was almost as 
bad as adultery or stealing -maybe just as bad. There rnust be a 
way to avoid Liza’s disapproval. She could make one suffer if 
she disapproved. 

• Samuel wouldn’t make it hard, but on the other hand you 
couldn’t avoid Samuel because he ^vas in the air every place. 
Tom had to tell Samuel. He said, ‘My father, I’m sorry. I can’t 
help it. You over-estimated me. You were wrong. I wish I could 
justify the love and the pride you squandered on me. Maybe 
you could figure a way out, but I can’t. I cannot live. I ve killed 
Dessie and I want to sleep.’ 

And his mind spoke for his fatlier absent, saying, ‘Why, I can 
uiiderstand how that could be. There .are so manv :ns to 

387 


choose from in the arc from birth back to birth again. But let’s 
think how we can make it all right with Mother. Why are you so 
impatient, dear?’ , 

‘I can’t wait, . that’s why,’ Tom said. ‘I can’t wait any 
more.’ 

‘Why, sure you can, my son, my darling. You’re grown great 
as I knew you would. Open the table drawer and then make use 
of that turnip you call your head.’ 

Tom opened the drawer and saw a tablet of Crane’s Linen 
Lawn and a package of envelopes to match and rv/o gnawed and 
crippled pencils and in the dust corner at the back a few 
stamps. He laid out the tablet and sharpened the pencils with 
his pocket-knife. 

He wrote, ‘Dear Mother, I hope you keep yourself well. I am 
going to plan to spend more time with you. Olive asked me for 
Thanksgiving and you know I’ll be there. Our little Olive, can 
cook a turkey nearly to match yours, but I know you will never 
believe that. I’ve had a stroke of good luck. Bought a horse for 
fifteen dollars - a gelding, and he looks like a blood horse to me. 

I got him cheap because he has taken a dislike to manlund. His 
former owner spent more time on his own back than on the 
gelding’s. I must say he’s a pretty cute article. He’s thrown me ' 
twice but I’ll get him yet, and if I can break him I’ll.'have one of 
the best horses m the whole county. And you can be sure I’ll 
break him if it takes all winter. I don’t know why I go on about 
him, only the man I bought him from said a funny thing. He 
said, “That horse is so mean he’d eat a man right off his back.” 
Well, remember what Father used to say when we went a rabbit 
- hunting? “Come back with your shield or on it.” I’ll see you 
¦t Thanksgiving. Your son Tom,’ 

He wondered whether it was good enough, but he was' too 
tired to do it again. He added, ‘P.S. I notice PoUy has not re- 
formed one bit. That parrot makes me blush.’ 

On another sheet he wrote, ‘Dear Will, No matter what you 
yourself may think -please help me now. For Mother’s sake- 
please. I was killed by a horse -tlirown and kicked in the head- 
please! Your brother Tom.’ 

He stamped tlie letters and put them in his pocket and he 
asked Samuel, ‘Is it all right?’ 

In his bedroom he broke open a new box of shells and put one 
of them in the cylinder of his well-oiled Smith and Wesson -38 
and he set the loaded chamber one space to the left of the firing- 
pin. 


3CQ 


His horse standing sleepily near the fence came to his whistle 
and stood drowsing while he saddled up. 

It was three o’clock in the morning when he dropped tlie let- 
ters in the post ofBce at King City and mounted and turned his 
horse south towards the unproductive hills of the old Hamilton 
place. 

He was a gallant gentleman. 




Part Four 


- CHAPTER 34 

A CHILD may ask, ‘What is the world’s story about?’ And a 
grown man or woman may wonder, ‘What way will the world 
go?' How does it end and, while we’re at it, what’s the story 
about?’ 

I believe that there is one story in the world, and only one, 
that has trightened and inspired us, so that we live in a Pearl 
White serial of continuing thought and wonder. Humans are 
caught in their lives, in their thoughts, in their hungers and 
ambitions, in their avarice and cruelty, and in their kindness and 
generosity too - in a net of good and evil. I think this is the only 
story we have and that it occurs on all levels of feeling and in- 
teUigence. Virtue and vice were warp and woof of our first con- 
sciousness, and they will be the fabric of our last, and this 
despite changes we may impose on field and river and mountain, 
on economy and manners. There is no other story. A man, after 
he has brushed off the dust and chips of his life, will have left 
only the hard, clean questions : Was it good or was it evil? Have 
I done well - or iU? ' 

Herodotus, in the Persian War, tells a story of how Croesus, 
the richest and most-favoured king of his time, asked Solon the 
Athenian a leading question. He would not have asked it if he 
had not been worried about the answer. ‘Who,’ he asked, ‘is the 
luckiest person in the world?’ He must have been eaten with 
doubt and htmgry for reassurance. Solon told him of three 
lucky people in old times. And Croesus more than likely did not 
listen, so anxious was he about himself. And when Solon did not 
mention him, Croesus was forced to say, ‘Do you consider me 
lucky?’ 

Solon did not hesitate in his answer. ‘How can I tell?’ he said 
‘You aren’t dead yet.’ 

And this answer must have haunted Croesus dismally ar 
luck disappeared, and his wealth and his kingdom. And - ee 
was being burned on a tall fire, he may have thought of ' 
perhaps wished he had not asked or not been answere'' 

And in our time, when a man dies - if he has had.' 

391 



influence and power and all the vestments tliat arouse envy, and- 
after the living take stock of the dead man’s property and his 
. eminence and works and monuments - the question is still there: 
Was his life, good or was it e\dl? - which is another y;ay of put- 
ting Croesus’s question. Envies are gone, and the measuring ' 
stick is: ‘Was he loved or was he hated? Is his death felt as a ; 
loss or does a^kind of joy come of it?’ - , , 

; I remember clearly the deaths of three men. One was the , 
richest, man of the century, who, having clawed his way to 
wealth tteough the souls and bodies of men, spent many years , 
trying to buy back the love he had forfeited and by that process 
performed great service to the world and, perhaps, had much 
more than balanced the evils of his rise. I was on a ship when he 
died. The news was posted on the bulletin board, and nearly 
everyone received the news with pleasure. Several said,. ‘Thank ' • 
God that son of a bitch is dead.’ 

Then there was a man, smart as Satan, who, lacking some per- 
ception of human dignity and knowdng all too weU every aspect 
of human weakness and wickedness, used his special knowledge 
to warp men, to buy men, to bribe and threaten and seduce until 
he found himself in a position of great power. He clothed his 
motives in the names of virtue, and I have wondered whether he . 
ever knew that no gift will ever buy back a man’s love when you 
have removed his self-love. A bribed man can only hate his 
briber. When this man died the nation rang tvith praise and, just 
beneath, with gladness that he ^vas dead. 

There was a third man, who perhaps made many errors in 
performance but whose effective life was dev’oted to making men 
brave and dignified and good in a time when they were poor and 
frightened and when ugly forces were loose in the world to 
utilize their fears. This man was hated by the few. When he died 
the people,J)urst into tears in the streets and their minds v^ailed, 
‘Wliat can we do now? How can we go on without him?’ 

In uncertainty I am certain that underneath their topmost 
layers of frailty men want to be good and want to be loved. , 
Indeed, most of their vices are attempted . short cuts to low. 
When a man comes to die, no matter what his talents and in- 
fluence and gem'us, if he dies unloved his life must be a failure 
to liim and his dying a cold horror. It seems to me that if you or 
I must chose between two courses of thought or action, we 
should remember our dying and trj' so to live that our death 
brings no pleasure, to the world. 

We have only one storyj All novels, all poetry, are built on the 

392 



never-ending contest in ourselves of good and evil. And it occurs 
to me that evil must constantly re-spavm, while good; while •vir- 
tue, is immoral. Vice has always a new fresh young face, while 
virme is venerable as nothing else in the world is. 


CHAPTER 3 5 

I 

Lee helped Adam and the two boys move to Salinas, 
which is to say he did it all, packed the things to be taken, saw 
them on the train, loaded the back seat of the Ford, and, arriv- 
ing in Salinas, unpacked and satv the family settled in Dessie’s 
little house. When he had done e%'erything he could tliink of to 
make them comfortable, and a number,, of things uimecessary, 
and more things for the sake of delay, he waited on Adam form- 
ally one evening after the twins had gone to bed. Perhaps Adam 
caught his intention from Lee’s coldness and formahty. ' 

Adam said, ‘All right. I’ve been expecting it. Tell me.’ 

That broke up Lee’s memorized speech, which he had in- 
tended to begin, ‘For a number of years I have served j-ou to the 
best of my ability and now I feel — ’ 

‘I’ve put it off as long as I could,’ said Lee. ‘I have a speech 
all ready. Do you want to hear it?’ 

‘Do you want to say it?’ 

‘No,’ said Lee.' ‘I don’t. And it’s a pretty good speech too.’ 

‘When do you want to go?’ Adam asked. 

‘As soon .as possible. I’m afraid I might lose my intention if I 
don’t go soon. Do you want me to wait until you get someone 
else?’ 

‘Better not,’ said Adam. ‘You know how slow I am. It might 
be some time. I might never get around to it.’ 

‘I’ll go tomorrow, then.’ 

‘It \vill tear the b 05 'S to pieces,’ Adam said. ‘I don’t know wlrat 
the}^!! do. Maybe you’d better sneak off and let me tell them 
afterwards.’- 

‘It’s my observation that children alwat-s surprise us/ .said 
Lee. 

And so it was. At breakfast the next momtug .‘V'-v .<ev.. 
‘Boys, Lee is going away.’ 

?P? 



, - ‘Is he?’ said Cal. ‘There’s a basketball game tonight, costs ten 
cents. Can we go?’ . • 

¦ ‘Yes. But did j'Ou hrar what I said?’ 

‘Sure/ said Aron. ‘You said Lee’s going away.’ 

‘ ‘But he’s not coming back.’ 

Cal asked, ‘Where’s he going?’ 

‘To San Francisco to live.’ 

, ‘Oh!’ said Aron. ‘There’s a man on Main Street, right on the 
street, and, he’s got a little stove and he cooks sausages and'puts 
them in buns. They cost a nickel. And you can take, all the, 
mustard you want.’ 

Lee stood in the kitchen door, smiling at Adam. ¦ 

When the twins got their books together Lee* said,- ‘Goodbye, 
boys.’ 

They shouted, ‘Goodbye!’ and tumbled out of tire house. 

Adam stared into his coffee-cup and said in apology, ‘What ¦ 

, little brutes! I guess that’s your reward for over ten years, of 
service.’ 

. ‘I like it better that way/ Lee said. ‘If they pretended sorrow 
they’d be liars. It doesn’t mean anything to them. Maybe they’ll , 
think of me sometimes - privately. I don’t want them to be sad. 

I hope I’m not so small-souled as to take satisfaction iii being 
missed.’ He laid fifty cents on the table in front of Adam. ‘When 
they start for the basketball game tonight, give them this from ' 
me and tell them to buy the sausage buns. My farewell gift may 
be ptomaine, for all I know.’ 

Adam looked at the telescope basket Lee brought into the 
dining-room. ‘Is that all your stuff, Lee?’ 

‘Everything but my books. They’re in boxes in, the cellar. If 
you don’t mind I’ll send for them or come for them after I get 
settled.’ 

‘Why, sure. I’m going to miss you, Lee, whether you want me 
to or not. Are you really going to get your bookstore?’ , 

‘That is my intention.’ 

‘You’U let us hear from you?’ 

‘I don’t know. I’ll have to think about it. They say a clean cut 
heals soonest. There’s nothing sadder to me than associations , 

- held together by nothing but the glue of postage stamps. If you 
can’t see or hear or touch a man, it’s best to let him go.' 

Adam stood up from the table. ‘I’ll walk to the depot with - 
you.’ • 

‘No!’ Lee said sharply. ‘No. I don’t want that.' Goodb3'e, Mr ' 
Trask. Goodbye, Adam.’ He went out of the house so fast that. 

394 



Adam’s ‘Goodbye’ reached him at the bottom of the front steps 
and Adam’s ‘Don’t forget to write’ sounded over the click of the 
front gate. 


II 

That night after the basketball game Cal and Aron each had five 
sausages on buns, and it was just as well, for Adam had forgot- 
ten to provide any supper. Walking home, the twins discussed 
Lee for the first time. 

‘I wonder if he went away?’ Cal asked. 

‘He’s talked about going before.’ 

‘What do you suppose he’ll do without us?’ 

T don’t know. I bet he comes back,’ Aron said. 

‘How do you mean? Father said he was going to start a book- 
store. That’s f imny. A Chinese bookstore.’ 

‘He’ll come back,’ said Aron. ‘He'll get lonesome for us. You’ll 
see.’ 

‘Bet you ten cents he don’t.’ 

‘Before when?’ 

‘Before for ever.’ 

‘That’s a bet,’ said Aron. 

Aron was not able to collect his winnings for nearly a month, 
but he won six days later. 

Lee came on the ten-forty and let himself in with his own key. 
There was a light in the dining-room, but Lee fotmd Adam in 
the kitchen, scraping at a thick black crust iii the frj'ing-pan 
with the point of a can opener. 

Lee put down his basket. ‘If you soak it overnight it will come 
right out’ 

‘Will it? I’ve burned everything I’ve cooked. There’s a sauce- 
pan of beets out in the yard. Smelled so bad I couldn’t have 
them in the house. Burned beets are awful — Lee ! ’ he cned, and 
then, ‘Is anything the matter?’ 

Lee took the black iron pan from him and put it in 'the sink 
and ran water in it ‘If we had a new gas stove we could make a 
cup of coffee in a few minutes,’ he said. ‘I might as well build up 
the fire.’ 

‘Stove won’t bum,’ said Adam. 

Lee lifted the lid. ‘Have you ever taken the ashes out?’ 

‘Ashes?’ 

‘Oh, go in the other room,’ said Lee. ‘I’ll make some coffee. 

Adam waited impatiently in the dining-room but he.,obeyed 

395 



his orders. At last Lee brought in two' cups of coffee and set 
them on the table. ‘Made it in a skillet/ he said. ‘Much faster/ 
He leaned over his telescope basket and untied the rope that held 
it shut. He brought out the stone botde. ‘Chinese absinthe/ he 
said. ‘Ng-ka-py maybe last ten more years. I forgot to ask 
whether you had replaced me.’ 

‘You’re beating about the bush/ said Adam. ^ • 

‘I know it. And I also know the best way would be just to tell 
it and get it over with/ 

‘You lost your money in a fan-tan game/ 

‘No. I wish that was it. No, I have my money. This damn 
cork’s broken - I’ll have to shove it in the bottle/ He poured tlie 
black liquor into his coffee, ‘I never drank it this way/ he said. 
,‘Say, it’s good/ 

, ‘Tastes likerotten apples/ said Adam. 

‘Yes, but remember Sam Hamilton said like good rotten 
apples.’ 

Adam said, ‘When do you think you’ll get around to telling 
me what happened to you ?’ 

‘Nothing happened to me/ said Lee. ‘I got lonesome. That’s 
all. Isn’t that enough?’ 

‘How about your bookstore?’ 

‘I don't want a bookstore. I think I knew it before I got on 
the train, but I took all this time to make sure.’ 

‘Then there’s your last dream gone/ 

‘Good riddance.’ Lee seemed on the verge of hysteria, ‘Missy 
Tlask, Chinee boy sink gung get dlunk,’ 

Adam was alarmed. ‘What’s the matter with you, any- 
’ way?’ 

Lee lifted the bottle to his lips and took a deep hot drink and 
panted the fumes out of his burning throat, ‘Adam,’ he said, ‘I : 
am incomparably, incredibly, overwhelmingly glad to be home. , 
I’ve never been so goddam lonesome in my life.’ 



CHAPTER 36 


I 

Sal i.n as had two grammar schools, big yellow structures 
with tall windows, and the windows were baleful and the doors 
did not smile. These schools were called the East End and the 
West 'End. Since the East End School was way to hell and gone 
across town and the children who lived east of Main Street 
attended there, I will not bother with it. 

• The West End, a huge building of two storeys, fronted with 
gnarled poplars, divided the play-yards called girlside and boy- 
side. Behind the school a high board fence separated girlside 
from boyside, and the back of the play-yard was bounded by 
a slough of standing water in which tall mles and even cat- 
tails grew.' The West End had grades from third to eighth. The 
first- and second-graders went to Baby School some distance 
away. 

In the West End there was a room for each grade -third, 
fourth, and fifth on the ground floor, sixth, seventh, eighth on 
the second floor. Each room had the usual desks of battered oak, 
a platform and square teacher’s desk, one Seth Thomas clock 
and one picture. The pictures identified the rooms, and the pre- 
Raphaelite influence was overwhelming. Galahad standing in 
full armour pointed the way for third-graders; Atlanta’s race 
urged on the fourth, the Pot of Basil confused the fifth grade, 
and so on until the denunciation of Cataline sent the eighth- 
graders on to high school with a sense of high civic virtue. 

Cal and Aron were assigned to the seventh grade because of 
their age, and they learned every, shadow of its picture -Lao- 
coon completely wrapped in snakes. 

The boys were stunned by the size and grandeur of the West 
End after their background in a one-room country school. The 
opulence of having a teacher for each grade made a deep im- 
pression on them. It seemed wasteful. But, as is true of all 
humans, they were stunned for one day, admiring on the second, 
and on the third day could not remember ver>^ clearly ever hs’ - 
ing gone to any other school. 

The teacher was dark and pretty, and by a judicious rdstf -' 
withholding of hands the twins had no worries. Cal 
out quickly and explained it to Aron. ‘You take most 
said, ‘if they know the answer, why, they h 

397 


and if they don’t know they just crawl under the desk. ICnow. 
wliat we’re going to do?’ 

' ‘No. What?’ 

‘Well, 5'ou notice the teacher don’t’' alwaj’s call on somebody 
with his hand up. She lets drive at the others and, sure enough, 
tliey don’t know.’ 

‘That’s right,’ said Aron. 

‘Now, first week we’re going to work like bedamned but we 
won’t stick iip our hands. So she’ll call on us and we’ll know. 
That’ll throw her. So the second week we, won’t work and we’ll 
stick up our hands and she won’t call on us. Third, week we’ll 
just sit quiet, and she won’t even know whether we got the 
answer or not. Pretty soon she’ll let us alone. She isn’t going to, 
waste her time calling on somebody that knows.’ 

Cal’s method worked. In a short time the twins were not only 
let alone but got themselves a certain reputation for smartness. 
As a matter of fact, Cal’s method was a waste of time. Both bop 
learned easily enough. 

Cal was able to de\’elop his marble game and set about gather- 
ing in all the chalkies and immies, glassies and agates, in the 
school-yard. He traded them for tops just as the marble season 
ended. At one time he had and used as legal tender at least 
forty-five tops of various sizes and colours, from the thick 
clumsy baby tops to the lean and dangerous splitters with their , 
needle points. 

Eveiy'one who saw the twins remarked on their difference one 
from the other and seemed puzzled that this should- be so. Cal 
was growing up dark-skinned, dark-haired. He was quick and 
sure and secret. Even though he may have tried, he could not 
conceal his cleverness. Adults were impressed with what seemed 
to them a precocious maturity, and they were a h’ttle frightened 
at it too. No one liked Cal verj^ much and yet e\'er}'one was 
touched with fear of him and through fear with -respect. Al- 
though he had no friends he was welcomed by his obsequious 
class-mates and took up a natural and cold position of leader- 
ship in the school-yard. 

If he concealed his ingenuity, he concealed his hints too. He, 
was regarded as thick-skinned and insensitive— even cruel. 

Aron drew love from ei'ery side. He seemed shy and delicate. 
His pink-and-white skin, golden hair, and wide-set blue eyes 
caught attention. In the school-yard his very prettiness caused 
some difficulty until it was discovered by his testers that Aron 
was a dogged, steady, and completely fearless fighter, particularly 

39S 



when he was crying. Word got around, and the natural punishers 
of new boys learned to let him alone. Aron did not attempt to 
hide his disposition. It was concealed by being the opposite of 
his appearance. He was unchanging once a course was set. He 
had few facets and very little versatility. His body was as insensi- 
tive to pain as was his mind to subtleties. 

Cal knew Iiis brother and could handle him by keeping him 
off balance, but this only worked up to a certain point. Cal had 
learned when to sidestep, when to run away. Change of direcdon 
confused Aron, but that was the only thing that confused him. 
He set his path and followed it and he did not see nor was he 
interested in an3n:hing beside his path. His emotions were few 
and heavy. All of him was hidden by his angelic face, and for 
this he had no more concern or responsibility than has a iawn 
for tlie dappling spots of its young hide. 

II 

On Aron’s first day at school he v/aited eagerly for the recess. He 
went over to the girlside to talk to Abra. A mob of squeafing 
girls could not drive him out. It took a full-grown teacher to 
force him “back to the boyside. 

At noon he missed her, for her father came by in his high- 
wheeled buggy and drove her home for her lunch. He waited 
outside the school-yard gate for her after school. 

She came out surrounded by girls. Her face v/as composed 
and gave no sign that she e.xpected him. She was far the pret- 
tiest girl in' the school, but it is doubtful whether Aron had 
noticed that. 

The cloud of girls hung on and hung on. Aron marched along 
three paces behind them, patient and unembarrassed even when 
the girls tossed their squealing barbs of insult over their shoul- 
ders at him. Gradually some drifted away to their own homes, 
and only three girls were with Abra when she came to the white 
gate .of her yard and turned in. Her friends stared at him a 
moment, giggled, and went on their way. 

Aron sat down on the edge of the sidewalk. After a moment 
the latch lifted, the white gate opened, and Abra emerged. She 
wallced across the walk and stood over him. “What do you 
,want?’ 

Aron’s wide eyes looked up at her. 'You aren’t engaged to any- 
body?’ 

‘Silly,’ she said. 


399 



He struggled up to his feet. ‘I guess it will be a long time 
before we can get married/ he said. 

,, ‘Who wants to get married?’ 

Aron didn’t answer. Perhaps he didn’t hear. He walked along . 
beside heri . ' ' 

Abra moved with firm and deliberate steps and she faced , 
straight ahrad. There was wisdom and sweemess in her e.vpres- 
sion. She stemed deep in tliought. And Aron, walldng beside, 
her, never took his eyes from her face. His attention seemed tied 
to her face by a taut string. 

They walked silendy past the Baby School, and there the 
pavement ended. Abra turned right and led the way through tlie 
! stubble of the summer’s liayfield. The black ’dobe clods crushed 
• under their feet. 

On the edge of the field stood a little pump-house, and a wil- 
' low tree flourished beside it, fed by the overspill ot water.' The 
long skirts of the willow hung down nearly to the ground. 

-Afara parted the switches like a curtain and went into the • 
. house of leaves made against the willow trunk by the sweeping 
branches. You could see out through the leaves, but inside it 
• was sweetly protected and warm and safe. .The afternoon sun- ¦ 
light came yellow through the ageing leaves. 

Abra sat down on the ground, or rather she seemed to drift , . 
down, and her full skirts settled in a billow around her. , 
She folded her hands in her lap almost as though she were 
praying. 

Aron sat down beside her. ‘I guess it will be a long time before , 
we can get married/ he said again. 

‘Not so long/ Abra said. 

‘I wish it was now.’ 

‘It won’t be long/ said Abra. 

Aron asked, ‘Do you think your father will let you?’ 

It was a new thought to her, and she turned and looked at 
him. ‘Maybe I won’t ask him.’ 

‘But your mother?’ „ . - , 

‘Let’s not disturb tliem,’ she said. ‘They’cT think. it was funny 
or bad. Can’t you keep a secret?’ 

‘Oh, yes. I can keep secrets better than anybody. And I’ve got 
some too.’ 

Abra said, ‘"Well, you just put this one with the others.’ 

Aron picked up a twig and drew a line on the dark earth. . 
‘Abra, do you know how you get babies?’ 

-Yes,’ she said. ‘Who told you?’ 

400 . 



‘Lee told me. He explained the whole thing. I guess we can’t 
have anj' babies for a long time.’ 

Abra’s mouth turned up at the comers with a condescending 
wisdom. ‘Not so long/ she said. 

‘We’U have a house together some time/ Aron said, bemused. 
‘We’ll go in and close the door and it will be nice. But that will 
be a long time.’ 

Abra put out her hand and touched him on the arm. ‘Don’t 
you worry about long times/ she said. ‘This is a kind of a house; 
We can play like we live here while we’re waiting. And you will 
be my husband and you can call me wife.’ 

He tried it over under his breath and then aloud. ‘Wife/ he 
said. 

‘It’ll be like practising/ said Abra. 

Aron’s arm shook under her hand, and she put it, palm up, in 
her lap. 

Aron said suddenly, ‘While we’re practising, maybe we could 
do something else.’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Maybe you wouldn’t like it.’ 

‘What is it?’ 

‘Maybe we could pretend like you’re my mother.’ 

‘That’s easy/ she said. 

‘Would you mind?’ 

‘No, I’d like it. Do you want to start now?’ 

‘Sure/ Aron said, ‘How do you want to go about it?’ 

‘bh, I can tell you that,’ said Abra. She put a cooing tone in 
her voice and said, ‘Come, my baby, put your head in Mother’ s 
lap. Come, my little son. Mother will hold you.’ She drew his 
head down and tvithout warning Aron began to cry and could 
not stop. He wept quietly, and Abra stroked his cheek and wiped 
the flowing tears away with the edge of her skirt. 

The sun crept down towards its setting place behind the 
Salinas River, and a bred began to smg wonderfully from the 
golden stubble of the field. It was as beautiful under the branches 
of the willow tree as anything in the world can be. 

Very slowly Aron’s weeping stopped, and he felt good and he 
felt warm. 

‘My good little baby,’ Abra said. ‘Here, let Mother brush your 
hair back.’ 

Aron sat up and said almost angrily, ‘I don’t hardly ever cry 
unless I’m mad. I don’t know why I cried.’ 

Abra asked, ‘Do you remember your mother ?’ 

401 



‘No. She died when I was a little bit of a babj'.’ ¦ 

‘Don’t you know what she looked like?’ 

¦No. . _ ' _ . ¦ 

‘Maybe you saw a picture.’ 

‘No, I tell you. We. don’t have any pictures. I asked Lee and 
he said no pictures -no, I ^ess it was Cal asked Lee.’ 

‘When did she die?’ 

‘Right after Cal and I tvere bom.’ 

‘What was her name ? ’ 

‘Lee says it was Cathy. Say, what are you asking so much 
for?’ 

Abra went on calmly, ‘How was she complected ?’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Light or dark hair ? ’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Didn’t' your father tell you?’ 

‘We never asked him.’ 

Abra was silent, and after a while Aron asked, ‘What’s the 
matter - cat got your tongue?’ 

' Abra inspected the setting sun. 

Aron asked uneasily, ‘You mad with me’ -and he added; 
tentatively - ‘wif e ? ’ 

‘No, I’m not mad. I’m just wondering.’ 

‘What about?’ 

‘About something.' Abra’s firm face was tight against a seeth- 
ing inner argument. She asked, ‘What’s it like not to have any 
mother?’ 

‘I don’t know. It’s like anything else.’ 

‘I guess you wouldn’t even know the difference,’ 

‘I would too. I wish you would talk out. You’re like riddles in 
the Bulletin’ 

Abra continued in her concentrated imperturbability, ‘Do you 
want to have a mother ? ’ . ' ' ' 

‘That’s crazy,’ said Aron. ‘ ’Course I do. Everybody does. You 
aren’t trying to hurt my feelings, are you? Cal tries that some- 
times and then he laughs.’ 

Abra looked away from the setting sun. She had difficultj' 
seeing past the purple spots tlie light had left on her eyes. ‘You 
said a little while ago you could keep secrets.' 

‘I can.’ 

‘Well, do you have a doublc-poison-and-cut-my-throat secret?’ 

‘Sure I have.’ - , 


402 



Abra said softly, ‘Tell me what it is, Aron.’ She put a caress 
in his name. 

‘Tell you what?’ 

‘Tell me the deepest down hell-and-goddam secret you know.’ 

Aron reared back from her in alarm. ‘Why, I wtU not,’ he 
said. ‘What right you got to ask me? I wouldn’t tell anybody.’ 

‘Come on, my baby —tell Mother,’ she crooned. 

There were tears crowding up in his eyes again, but this time 
they were tears of anger. ‘I don’t know as I want to marry you,’ 
he said. ‘I think I’m going home now.’ 

Abra put her hand on his wrist and hung on. Her voice lost 
its coquetry'. ‘I wanted to see. I guess you can keep secrets all 
right.’ 

‘Why did you go for to do it? I’m mad now. I feel sick.’ 

‘I think I’m going to teU you a secret,’ she said. 

‘Ho ! ’ he jeered at her. ‘Who can’t keep a secret now?’ 

. ‘I was going to decide,’ she said. ‘I think I’m going to tell you 
this secret because it might be good for you. It might make you 
glad.’ 

‘Who told you not to tell?’ 

‘Nobody,’ she said. ‘I only told myself.’ 

. ‘Well, I guess that’s a little diflferent. What’s your old secret?’ 

The red sun leaned its rim on the roof-tree of Toilet’s house 
on the Blanco Road, and Toilet’s chimney stuck up like a black 
thumb against it. 

¦ Abra^ said softly, ‘Listen, you remember when we came to 
your place that time?’ 

‘Sure!’ 

‘Well, in the buggy I went to sleep, and when I woke up my 
father and mother didn’t know I was awake. They said your 
mother wasn’t dead. They said she went away. They said some- 
thing bad must have happened to her, and she went away.’ 

Aron said hoarsely. ‘She’s dead.’ 

‘Wouldn’t it be nice if she wasn’t?’ 

‘My father says she’s dead. He’s not a liar.’ 

‘Maybe he thinks she’s dead.’ 

He said, ‘I think he’d know.’ But there was uncertainty in his 
tone. 

Abra said, ‘Wouldn’t it be nice if we could find her? S’pose, 
she lost her memory or something. I’ve read about that. And we 
could find her and that would make her remember.’ The glory 
of tlie romance caught her like a rip tide and carried her aw-ay.,_ 

Aron said, ‘I’ll ask my father.’ ¦ • 

403 


‘Aron/ she said stemly/what I told you is a secret.’ . 

: /Who says?’ . ' ' ¦ . 

, /I say. Now you just say after me- "I’ll take double poison 
and cut my throat if I tell.” ’ 

. For a. moment he hesitated and then he repeated^ -TU take 
double yioison and cut my throat if I tell.' 

She said, ‘Now spit in your pahn-like this -that’s right. , ¦ 
Now you give me your; hand- see? -squidge the spit all to- , 
gether.~--Now rub it dry on your hair.’ The two followed the 
formula, and then Abra said solemnly, ‘Now, I’d just like to see 
you tell that one. I knew one girl that told a secret after that 
oath and she burned up in a barn fire.’ 

The sun was gone behind Tollot’s house and the gold, light 
with it. The evening star shimmered over Mount Toro. . , 

Abra said, ‘They’ll skin me alive. Come on. Hurry! I bet my . 
father’s got the dog whistie out for me. I’ll get whipped.’. 

Aron looked at her in disbelief. ‘Whipped ! They don’t whip, 
you?’ 

‘That’s what you think!’ 

Aron said passionately, *¥00 just let them try. If they go for • . 
to v/hip you, you tell them I’ll kill them.’ His wide-set blue eyes 
were slitted and glinting. ‘Nobody’s going to whip my wife,’, he ' 
said. 

Abra put her arms around his neck in the dusk under the wil- 
low tree. She kissed him on his open mouth. ‘I love you, hus- 
band,' she said, and then she turned and bolted, holding up her 
skirts above her knees, her lace-edged white drawers fiashing as 
she ran towards home. i 


III 

Aron went back to the trunk of the willow tree and sat on the 
ground and leaned back against the bark. His mind was a grey- . 
ness and there were churnings of pain in his stomach. He tried 
to sort out the feeling into thoughts and pictures so the pain 
would go away. It was hard. His slow deliberate mind could not ' , 
accept so many thoughts and emotions at once. The 'door iras j 

shut against everything except physical pain. After a witile the ; 

door opened a little and let in one thing to be scrutinized and . f 
then another and another, until all had been absorbed, one at a - 

time. Outside his closed mind a huge thing was clamouring to 
get in. Aron held it back until last. , , i 

First he let Abra in and went over her dress, her face, the feel . 

404 ' ' . 


of her on his cheek, the odour that came from her, lil:e' 
milk a little and like cut grass a little. He saw and felt and heard 
and smelled her all over again. He thought how clean she vyas, 
her hands and fingernails, and how straightforward and unlilce 
the gigglers in the school-yard. 

Then, in order, he thought of her holding his head and his 
baby crying, crying with longing, wanting something and in a 
way feeling that he was getting it. Perhaps the getting it was 
what had made him cry. 

Next he thought of her trick -her testing of him. He won- 
dered what she would have done if he had told her a secret. 
What secret could he have told her if he had wished? Right now 
he didn’t recall any secret except the one that was beating on the 
door to get into his mind. 

The sharpest question she had asked. How does it fed not to 
have a mother?’ slipped into his mind. And how did it fed? It 
didn’t fed like an3nhing. Ah, but in the schoolroom, at Christ- 
mas and graduation, when the mothers of other children came 
to the parties — then was the silent cry and the wordless longing. 
That’s what it was like. 

Salinas was sturounded and penetrated with swamps, with 
tule-fiUed ponds, and every pond spawned thousands of frogs. 
With the et^ening the air was so full of their song that it was a 
kind of roaring silence. It was a veil, a background, and its sud- 
den disappearance, after a clap of thimder, was a shocking thing. 
It is possible that if in the night the frog sotmd should have 
stopped, everyone in Salinas would have awakened, feeling that 
there was a great noise. In their millions the frog songs seemed 
to have a beat and a cadence, and perhaps it is the ears’ function 
to do this just as it is the eyes’ business to make stars twinkle. 

It was quite dark under the willow tree now. Aron wondered 
whether he was ready for the big thing, and while he wondered 
it slipped through and was in. 

His mother was alive. Often he had pictured her lying tmder- 
ground, still and cool and unrotted. But this was not so. Some- 
where she moved about and spoke, and her hands moved and 
her eyes w'ere open. And in the midst of this flood of pleasure a 
sorrow came down on him and a sense of loss, a dreadful loss. 
Aron was puzzled. He inspected the cloud of sadness. If his 
mother was alh'e, his father was a liar. If one was alive, the 
otlier was dead. Aron said aloud under the tree, ‘My mother is 
dead. She’s buried some place in the East.’ 

In the darkness he saw Lee’s face and heard Lc^’*' !;r)eech. 

405 



Lee had built very, well. Having a respect that amounted to' 
reverence for the truth he had also its natural opposite, a loath- 
ing of a lie. He had made it very clear to the boys exactly what: 
he rneant. If something.was untrue and you didn't know it, that 
was error. But if you knew a true thing and changed it to a 
false thing, both you and it were loathsome. . : 

, Lee’s voice said, ‘I know, that sometimes a lie is used in kind- 
ness. I don’t believe it ever works kindly. The quick pain of 
.truth can pass away, but the slow, eating agony of a lie is.nevcr 
lost. That’s a running sore.’ And Lee had worked patiently and 
slowly and he had^ucceeded in building Adam' as the centre, the 
foundation, the essence of truth. . , ¦ i 

Aron shook his head in the dark, shook it hard in disbelief. 
‘If my father is a liar, Lee is a liar too.’ He. was lost. He had no 
one to ask. Cal was a liar, but Lee’s conviction had made a 
. clever liar. Aron felt that something had to die -his mother or 
his world. , , » 

His solution lay suddenly before him. Abra had not lied. She 
had told him only what she had heard, and her parents had only 
heard it too. He got to his feet and pushed his mother back into 
death and closed his mind against her. 

He was late for supper. T was with Abra,’ he explained. After 
supper, when Adam sat in his new comfortable chair, reading 
the Salinas Index, he felt a stroking touch on his shoulder and 
looked up. ‘'What is it, Aron?’ he asked. 

‘Good night, Fatlier,’ Aron said. 



CHAPTER 37 


I 

February in Salinas is likely to be damp and cold and full 
of miseries. The heaviest rains fall then and if the river is going 
to rise, it rises then. February of 1915 was a year heavy with 
water. - 

The Trasks were well established in Salinas. Lee, once he had 
given up his brackish bookish dream, made, a new kind of place 
for himself in the house beside Reynaud’s Bakery. On the ranch 
his possessions Iiad never really been unpacked, for Lee .had’ 
lived poised to go somewhere else. Here, for the first time in his 

406 - 



life, he built a home for himself, feathered with comfort and 
permanence. 

The large bedroom nearest the street door fell to him. Lee 
dipped into his savings. He had never before sp>ent a needless 
penny, since all money had been earmarked for his bookstore. 
But now he bought a little hard bed and a desk. He buUt book- 
shelves and unpacked his books, invested in a soft rug and 
tacked prints on the walls. He placed a deep and comfortable 
Morris chair under the best reading-lamp he could find. And 
last he bought a typewriter and set about learning to use it. 

Having broken out of his own Spartanism, he remade the 
Trask household, and Adam gave him no opposition. A gas stove 
came into the house and electric wires and a telephone. He spent 
Adam’s money remorselessly — new furniture, new carpets, a gas 
water-heater, and a large ice-box. In a short time there was 
hardly a house in Salinas so well equipped. Lee defended himself 
to Adam, saying, ‘You have plenty of money. It would be a 
shame not to enjoy it.’ 

‘I’m not complaining,’ Adam protested. ‘Only I’d like to buy 
something too. What shall I huy?’ 

‘Why don’t you go to Logan’s music store and listen to one 
of the new phonographs?’ 

‘I think I’ll do that,’ said Adam. And he bought a Victor vic- 
trola, a tall Gothic instrument, and he went regularly to see 
what new records had come in. 

The growing century was shucking Adam out of his shell. 
He subscribed to the Atlantic Monthly and the National Geo- 
graphic. He joined the Masons and seriously considered the 
Ell«. The new ice-bo.x fascinated him. He bought a textbook 6ir 
refrigeration and began to study it. 

The truth was that Adam needed work. He came out of his 
Dng sleep, needing to do something. 

‘I think I’ll go into business,’ he said to Lee. 

‘You don’t need to. You have enough to live on.’ 

‘But I’d like to be doing something.’ 

‘That’s different,’ said Lee. ‘Know what you want to do? I 
lon’t think }nu’d be very good at business.’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘Just a thought,’ said Lee. 

‘Say, Lee, I want you to read an article. It says they’ve dug up 

mastodon in Siberia. Been in the ice thousands of years. And 
he meat’s still good.’ 

Lee smiled at him. ‘You’ve got a bug in your bonnet some- 

407 



, where/ he said. ‘What , have you got in .all those little cups in 
the ice-box?’, 

.-.'Different things.’ 

‘Is that’ the business? Some of the cups smell bad/ 

‘It’s, an idea/ Adam said, ‘I can’t seem to stay away from it. 
I just can’t seem , to get over the idea that you can keep things if 
you get th^ cold enough.’ 

‘Lefs not. have any mastodon meat in our ice-box/ said Lee. 

If Adam had conceived thousands of ideas, the .way Sam 
Hamilton had, they might all have drifted away,- but he had only 
the one. The frozen mastodon stayed in his mind. His little cups 
: of fruit, of pudding, bits of meat, both cooked and raw, con- 
tinued in the ice-box. He bought every available book on bac- 
teria and began sending for magazines and printed articles of a 
. mildly scientific nature. And, as is usually true of a man of one 
. idea, he became obsessed. 

Salinas had a small ice company, not large but enough to 
supply the few houses with ice-boxes and to service the ice- 
cream parlours. The horse-drawn ice wagon went its route et'cry 
day. 

Adam began to visit the ice plant, and pretty soon he was 
taking his little cups to the freezing chambers. He wished with 
all his heart that Sam Hamilton were alive to discuss cold with 
him. Sam would have covered the field very quickly, he thou^t. 

Adam was walking back from the ice plant one rainy after- 
noon, thinking about Sam Hamilton, when he saw Will Hamil-, 
ton go into the Abbot House Bar. He followed him and leaned 
'* against tiie bar beside him. ‘Why don’t you come up and have 
some supper with us?’ 

‘I’d like to/ Will said. ‘I tell you what — I’ve got a deal I'm 
trying to put through. If I get finished in time I’ll walk by. Is 
there something important?’ 

‘Well, I don’t know. I’ve been doing some thinking and I’d‘ 
like to ask your advice.’ . ' 

Nearly every business proposition in the country came sooner 
or later to Will Hamilton’s attention. He might have excused 
himself if he had not remembered that Adam was- a. rich man. 
An idea was one thing, but backed up with cash was quite an- 
other. ‘You wouldn’t entertain a reasonable offer for your ranch, 
would you?’ he asked. 

‘Well, the boys, particularly Cal, they like tlie place. I think 
I’ll hang on to it.’ 

' ‘I think I can turn it over for you.’ 

408 



‘No, it’s rented, paying its own taxes, ril hold on to it’ 

‘If I can’t get in for supper I might be able to come in after- 
wards,’ said WiU. 

Will Hamilton was a very substantial business man. No one 
knew exactly how many pies his thumb had explored, but it was 
Itnown that he was a clever and comparatively rich man. His , 
business deal had been non-existent It was a part of his policy 
always to be busy and occupied. 

He had supper alone in the Abbot House. After a considered 
time he walked round the comer on Central Avenue and rang 
the bell of Adam Trask’s house. 

The boys had gone to bed. Lee sat with a darning basket, 
mending the long black stockings the nvins wore at school. 
Adam had been reading the Scientific Afnerican. He let Will in 
and placed a chair for him. Lee brought a pot of coffee and went 
back to his mending. 

Will settled himself into a chair, took out a fat black cigar, 
and lighted up. He waited for Adam to open the game. 

‘Nice weather for a change. And how’s your mother?’ Adam 
said. 

‘Just fine. Seems younger every day. The boys must be grow- 
ing up.’ 

‘Oh, they are. Cal’s going to be in' his school play. He’s quite 
an actor. Aron’s a real good student. Cal wants to go to farm- 
ing.’ 

‘Nothing wrong with that if you go about it right. Country 
could use some forward-looking farmers.’ Will waited uneasily. 
He wondered if it could be that Adam’s money was exaggerated. 
Could Adam be getting ready to borrow money? Will quickly 
worked out how much he would lend on the Trask ranch and 
how much he could borrow on it. The figures were not the same, 
nor was the interest rate. And still Adam did not come up with 
his proposition. Will grew 'restless. ‘I can’t stay very long, he 
said. ‘Told a fellow I’d meet him later tonight.’ 

‘Have another cup of coffee,’ Adam suggested. 

‘No thanks. Keeps me awake. Did you have something j'ou 
wanted to see me about?’ 

Adam said, ‘I was thinking about your father and I thought 


I’d like to talk to a Hamilton.’ ,, , 

Will relaxed a little in his chair. ‘He was a great oW talker. 
‘Somehow he made a better man than he was, sai 
Lee looked up from his darning egg. I^r 
versationalist in the world is the man who helps ^ 


409 



Will said, 'You know, it sounds funny to hear you use all 
those two-bit words. I’d swear to God you used to talk pidgin.’ 

‘I used to,’ said Lee. ‘It was vanity, I guess.’ He smiled at ; 
Adam and said to Will, ‘Did you hear that .somewhere up in 
Siberia they dug a mastodon out of the ice? It had been there 
a hundred thousand years' and the meat was still fresh.’ . 

‘Mastodon?’ - ¦ ¦ 

‘Yes, a kind of elephant that hasn’t lived on the earth for a ; 
longtime.’ , ' . 

¦ ‘Meat was still fresh?’ 

‘Sweet as a pork chop,’ said Lee. He shoved the wooden egg 
into the shattered knee of a black stocking. 

‘That’s very interesting,’ said Will. 

Adam laughed. ‘Lee hasn’t wiped my nose yet, but, that will 
come,’ he said. ‘I guess I’m pretty rotmdabout. The whole thing 
comes up because I’m tired of just sitting around. I want to get 
something to take up my time.’ 

‘Why don’t you farm your place?’ 

‘No. That doesn’t interest me. You sec. Will, I’m not like a 
man looking for a job. I’m looking for work. I don’t need a 
job.’ 

Will came out of his cautiousness, ‘Well, what can I do for .. 
you?’ 

‘I thought I’d tell you an idea I had, and you might give me ' 
an opinion. You’re a business man.’ 

‘Of course,’ said Will. ‘Anything I can do.’ 

‘I’ve been looking into refrigeration,’ said Adam. ‘I, got an. . 
idea and I can’t get rid of it. I go to sleep and it comes right 
back at me. Never had anything give me so much trouble. It’s, 
kind of a big idea. Maybe it’s full of holes.’ 

Will uncrossed his legs and pulled at his trousers where they 
were binding him. ‘Go ahead - shoot,’ he said. ‘Like a cigar?’ 

Adam didn’t hear the offer, nor did he know the implication. 
‘The whole country’s changing,’ Adam said. 'People aren’t going 
to live the way they used to. Do you know where the biggest 
market for oranges in the winter is?’ 

'No. Where?’ 

‘New York City. I read that. Now in the cold parts of the 
country, don’t you think people get to wanting perishable things 
in the winter - like peas and lettuce and cauliflower? In a .bfe . 
part of the country they don’t have those things for months and 
months. And right here in the Salinas Valley we can raise them / 
all the year round.’ 


410 



‘Right here isn’t right there/ said Will. ‘What’s your idea?’ 

‘Well, Lee made me get a big ice-box, and I got kind of in- 
terested. I put different kinds of vegetables in there. And I got 
to arranging them different ways. You know. Will, if you chop 
ice fine and lay a head of lettuce in it and wrap it in waxed 
paper, it will keep tliree weeks and come out fresh and good.’ 

‘Go on/ said Will cautiously. 

‘Well, you know the railroads built those fruit cars. I went 
down and had a look at them. They’re pretty good. Do you 
know we could ship lettuce right to the east coast in* the middle 
of winter?’ 

Will asked, ‘Where do you come in?’ 

‘I was thinking of buying the ice plant here in Salinas and 
trying to ship some things.’ 

•‘That would cost a lot of money.’ 

‘I have quite a lot of money/ said Adam. 

Will Hamilton pulled his lip' angrily. ‘I don’t knov/ why I got 
into this/ he said. ‘I know better.’ 

‘How do you mean?’ 

'Look here/ said Will. ‘When a man comes to me for advice 
about an idea, I Imow he doesn’t want advice. He wants me to 
agree with him. And if I want to keep his friendship I tell him 
his idea , is fine and go ahead. But I like you and you're a friend 
of my family, so I’m going to stick my neck out.’ 

Lee put down his darning, moved his sewing basket to the’ 
-floor, and changed his glasses. 

Adam remonstrated, ‘What are you getting upset about?’ 

‘I come from a whole goddam family of inventors/ said Will. 
‘We had ideas for breakfast. We had ideas instead of breakfast. 
We had so many ideas we forgot to make the money for gro- 
ceries. When we got a little ahead my father, or Tom, patented 
something. I’m the only one in the family, except my mother,' 
who didn’t have ideas, and I’m the only one who ever made a 
dime. Tom had ideas about helping people, and some of it "^vas 
pretty darn near socialism. And if you tell me you don’t care 
about making a profit, I’m going to throw that coffee-pot right 
at your head;’ 

‘ Well, I don’t care much.’ 

‘You stop right there, Adam. I’ve got my neck out. If you 
want ,tq drop forty or fifty thousand dollars quick, you just go 
on with your idea. But I’m telling, you -let your damned idea 
lie. Kick dust over it.’ 

‘What’s wrong with it?’ 


411 



‘Everything's vvrong with it. People in the East aren’t used to 
vegetables in the winter. They wouldn’t buy them. You get your 
cars snick on a siding and you’ll lose the shipment. The market 
is controlled. Oh, Jesus Ghristl It makes me mad when babies 
try to ride into business on an idea.’ 

Adam sighed.. ‘You make Sam Hamilton sound like a crim- 
inal,’ he said. ' - 

‘Well, he was my father and I loved him, but I wish to God 
,he bad let ideas alone.’ Will looked at Adam and saw amaze- 
rhent in his eyes, and suddenly Will was ashamed. -He shook his 
head slowly from side to side. ‘I didn’t mean to run down my 
people,’ he said. T think they were good people. But, my advice 
to, you stands. Let refrigeration alone.’ 

' Adam turned slowly to Lee. ‘Have we got any. more of that 
lemon pie we had for supper?’ he asked. 

'I don’t think so,’ said Lee. ‘I thought I heard mice in the 
kitchen. I’m afraid there will be white of egg on the boys’, pil- 
lows. You’ve got half a quart of whisky.’ 

’ ‘Have I. Why don’t we have that?’ 

‘I got excited,’ said Will, and he tried to laugh at himself. ‘A : ' 
drink would do me good.’ His face was fiery red and his voice 
was strained in his throat. ‘I’m getting too fat,’ he said. 

But he had two drinks and relaxed. Sitting comfortably, he . 
instructed Adam. ‘Some things don’t ever change their value,' 
he said. 'If you want to put money into something, you look 
around at the world. This war in Europe is going to go on a' 
long time. And when there’s war there’s going to be hungrj' 
people. I won’t say it is so, but it wouldn’t surprise me if v/e , 
'got into it. I don’t trust this Wilson -he’s all theory and big 
words. And if we do get into it, there’s going to be fortunes 
made in imjjerishable foods. You take rice and com and wh^t 
arid beans, they don’t need ice. They keep, and people can stay- . 
alive on them. I’d say if you were to plant your whole damned 
bottom land to beans and just put them avyay, why, your boys 
wouldn’t have to worry about the future. Beans are up to three 
cents now. If we get into the war I wouldn’t be surprised if thej’ 
went to ten cents. And you keep beans dry and they’ll be right 
there, waiting for a market. If you want to turn a profit, you 
plant beans.’ 

He went away feeling good. The shame that had come over = 
him was gone and he knew he had given sound advice. 

After Will had gone Lee brought out . one-third, of a . lemon , 
pie and cut it in two. ‘He’s getting too fat,’ Lee said. , 

412 



Adam was thinking. ‘I only said I wanted something to do/ 
he observed. 

'How about the ice plant?’ 

‘I think I’ll buy it.’ 

‘You might plant some beans too/ said Lee. 


II 

Late in the year Adam made- his great try, and it was a sensation 
in a year of sensations, both local and international. As he got 
ready, business men spoke of him as far-seeing, forward-looking, 
progress-minded. The departure of six car-loads of lettuce 
packed in ice was given a civic overtone. The Chamber of Com- 
merce attended the departure. The cars were decorated with big 
posters which said, 'Salinas Valley Lettuce’. But no one wanted 
to invest in the project. 

Adam untapped energy he did not suspect he had. It was a 
big job to gather, trim, box, ice, and load the lettuce. There was 
no equipment for such work. Everything had to be improvised, 
a great many hands hired and taught to do the work. Everyone 
gave advice but no one helped. It was estimated that Adam had 
spent a fortune on his idea, but how big a fortune no one knew. 
Adam did not know. Only Lee knew. 

The idea looked good. The lettuce was consigned to commis- 
¦ sion merchants in New York at a fine price. Then the train was 
gone and everyone went home to wait. If it was a success any 
number of men were willing to dig down to put money in. Even 
Will Hamilton wondered whether he had not been wrong with 
his advice. 

If the scries of events had been planned by an omnipotent and 
unforgiving enemy it could not have been more effective. As the 
train came into Sacramento a snow slide closed the Sierras for 
two days and the six cars stood on a siding, dripping their ice 
away. On the third day the freight crossed the mountains, and 
that was the time for unseasonable warm weather throughout the 
Middle West. In Chicago there developed a confusion of orders 
-no one’s fault, just one of those things that happens -and 
Adam’s six cars of lettuce stood in the yard for five more da.^ 
That was enough, and there is no reason to go into it in 
What arrived in New York was six car-loads of hom^’ 
with a sizeable charge just to get rid of it. 

Adam read the telegram from tlie comi“'“' — ’ 

413 



settled back in his chair and a strange' enduring smile came on 
his face and did; not go away: ' . 

• Lee kept away from him to let him get a grip of himself; The 
boys heard the rriiction in Salinas. Adam was a, fool. These 
know-it-all dreamers always got into trouble. Business men con- 
gratulated themselves on their foresight in keeping out of it. It 
took experience to be a business man. People who inherited their 
money always got into trouble. And if you wanted proof - just 
look at how Adam had run his ranch. A fool and his money 
were soon parted. Maybe that would teach him a lesson. And he 
had doubled the output of the ice company. . _ 

Will Hamilton recalled that he had not only argued against it 
blit had foretold in detail what would happen. He did not feel 
pleasure, but what could you do when a man wouldn’t take 
advice from a sound business man? And, God knows, Will had 
plenty of experience with fly-by-night ideas. In a roundabout ¦ 
way it was recalled that Sam Hamilton had been a fool too. And 
as for Tom Hamilton -he had been just crazy. 

When Lee felt that enough time had passed he did not beat 
around the bush. He sat directly in front of Adarh to get and to 
keep his attention. 

'How do you feel?’ he asked. 

‘All right.’ 

‘ ‘You aren't going to crawl back in your hole, are you?’ 

‘What makes you think that?’ Adam asked. 

‘Well, you have the look on your face you used to wear. And 
you’ve got that sleep-walker light in your eyes. Does this hurt 
, your feelings?’ 

‘No,’ said Adam. ‘The only thing I was wondering about tvas 
whether I'm wiped out.’ 

‘Not quite,’ said Lee. ‘You have about nine thousand dollars, 
left and the ranch.’ 

‘Theres’ a two-thousand-doilar bill for garbage disposal,’ said 
Adam. 

‘That’s before the m'ne thousand.’ 

‘I owe quite a bit for the new ice machinery.' 

‘Thafspaid.’ 

‘1 have nine thousand?’ 

'And the ranch,’ said Lee. ‘Maybe you can sell the ice 
plant.’ 

Adam’s face tightened up and lost the dazed smile, ‘I still be- 
Hev'e it will work,’ he said. ‘It was a whole lot of accidents. I’m 
going to keep the ice plant. Cold docs preserve thin^. Besides, 

414 



the plant makes some money. Maybe I can figure something 
out.’ 

‘Try not to figure something that costs money,’ said Lee. ‘I 
would hate to leave my gas stove.’ 

Ill 

The twins felt Adam’s failure very deeply. They were fifteen 
years old and they had known so long that they were sons of a 
wealthy man that the feeh'ng was hard to lose. If only the affair 
had not been a kind of carnival it would not have been so bad. 
They 'remembered the big placards on the freight cars with 
horror. If the business men made fun of Adam, the high-school 
group was much more cruel. Overnight it became the thing to 
. refer to the boys as ‘Aron and Cal Lettuce’, or simply as ‘Let- 
tuce-head’. 

. Aron discussed his problem with Abra. ‘It’s going to make a 
big difference,’ he told her. 

Abra had grown to be a beautiful girl. Her breasts were ris- 
ing with the leaven of her years, and her face had the calm and 
warmth of beauty. She had gone beyond prettiness. She was 
strong and sure and feminine. 

She looked at his worried face and asked, ‘Why is it going to 
make a difference?’ 

‘Well, one thing, I think we’re poor.’ 

‘You would have worked anyway.’ 

‘You know I want to go to college.’ 

‘You . still can. I’ll help you. Did your father lose all his 
money?’ , 

- ‘I don’t know. That’s what they say.’ 

‘Who is “they”?’ Abra asked. 

‘Why, everybody. And maybe your father and mother won’t 
want you to marry me. ’ 

‘Then I won’t tell them about it,’ said Abra. 

‘You’re pretty sure of yourself.’ . . , 

‘Yes,’ she said, ‘I’m pretty sure of myself. Will you kiss me? 

‘Right here? Right in the street?’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘Everybody’d see.’ 

‘I want theiii to,’ said Abra. _ , 

Aron said, ‘No, I don’t like to make things public like that. 

She stepped around in front of him and .stonned him. ou 
look here, mister. You kiss me now.’ 

415 


•Why?’ • ¦ 

She said slowly, ‘So CTerybody will know thit, I’m Mrs 
Lettuce-head,’ . • 

He gave her a quick embarrassed peck and then, forced her 
beside him again. ‘Maybe I ought to call it off myself,’ he said. 

.‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Well, I’m not good enough for you now. I’m just another 
poor kid. You think I haven’t seen the difference in your 
father?’ 

‘You’re just crazy,’ Abra said. And she frowned adittle be- 
cause she had seen the difference in her father too. 

They went into Bell’s candy store and sat at a table. The rage 
%vas celery tonic that year. The year before it had been root-beer 
ice-cream sodas. 

> Abra stirred bubbles delicately with her straw and thought 
how her father had changed since the lettuce faOure. He had 
said to her, ‘Don’t you think it would be wise to see someone 
else for a change?’ ¦ 

‘But I’m engaged to Aron.’ 

‘Ejigaged?’ he snorted at her. ‘Since when do children 
engaged? You’d better look around a little. There arc other fish 
in the sea.’ 

And she remembered that recently there had been references 
to suitability of families and once a hint 'that some people ' 
couldn’t keep a scandal hidden for ever. This hadjjappened o^y 
when Adam was reputed to have lost all of his money. 

She leaned across the table. ‘You know, what we could really 
do is so simple it will make you laugh.’ 

‘What?’ 

‘We could run your father’s ranch. My father says it’s beauti- 
ful land.’ 

‘No,’ Aron said quickly. 

‘Why not?’ 

‘I’m not going to be a farmer and you’re not going to be a 
fanner’s wife.’ 

‘I’m going to be Aron's wife, no matter what he is.’ 

‘I’m not going to give up college,’ he said. 

‘I’ll help you,’ Abra said again. 

‘Where would you get the money?’ 

‘Steal it,’ she said. 

‘I want to get out of this town,’ he said. 'Everybody’s sneering 
at rac. I can’t stand it here.’ 

‘They’ll forget it pretty soon.’ 

416 


‘No, they won’t either. I don’t want to stay two j-ears more to 
finish high school.’ - 

• ‘Do you want to go away from me, Aron?’ 

‘No. Oh damn it, why did he have to mess with things he 
doesn’t know about?’ 

Abra reproved him. ‘Don’t you blame your father. If it had 
woiked everybody’d been bowing to him.’ 

‘Well, it didn’t work. He sure fixed me. I can’t hold up my 
head. By God! I hate him!’ 

Abra said sternly, ‘Aron! You stop talking like that!’ 

‘How do I know he didn’t lie about my mother?’ 

Abra’s face reddened with anger. “You ought to be spanked,’ 
she said. ‘If it wasn’t in front of everybody I’d spank you my- 
self.’ She looked at his beautiful face, twisted, now with rage and 
frustration, and suddenly she changed her tactics. ‘Why don’t 
you ask about your mother? Just come right out and ask him.’ 

‘I can’t, I promised you.’ 

‘You only promised not to say what I told you.’ 

‘Well, if I asked him he’d want to know where I heard.’ 

‘All right,’ she cried, ‘you’re a spoiled baby ! I let you out of 
your promise. Go ahead and ask him.’ 

‘I don’t knotv if I will or not.’ 

‘Sometimes I want to kill you,’ she said. ‘But, Aron -I do 
love you so. -I do love you so.' There was giggling from the 
stools inTront of the soda fountain. Their voices had risen and 
they were overheard by their peers. Aron blushed and tears of 
anger started in his eyes. He ran out of the store and plunged 
away up the street. 

Abra calmly picked up her purse and straightened her skirt 
and brushed it with her hand. She walked calmly over to Mr 
Bell and paid for the celery tonics. On her way to the door she 
stopped by the giggling group. ‘You let him alone,’ she said 
coldly. She walked on, and a falsetto followed her — ‘Oh, Aron, 
I do love you so.’ 

In the street she broke into a nm to try to catch up with Aron, 
but she couldn’t find him. She called on the telephone. Lee said 
that Aron had not come home. But Aron was in his bedroorn, 

. lapp)ed in resentments — Lee had seen him creep in and close his 
door behind him. 

Abra walked up and down the streets of Salinas,- hoping to 
catch sight of him. She was angry at him, but she was also be- 
wilderingly lonely. Aron hadn’t ever run away from her before. 
Abra had lost her gift for being alone. 

417 


..Cal had to learn loneliness.. For a very short .time he tried to 
join Abra and Aron^ but they didn’t want him. He was jealous 
and tried to attract the girl to liimsclf and failed. 

His Studies he found easy and not greatly inferesting; Aron . 
had to work harder to learn, wherefore Aron had a greater sense 
of accomplishment when he did learn, and he developed a re- 
spect for learning out of all proportion tvith the quality of the 
learning. Cal. drifted through. He didn’t care much for the 
sports at school or for the activities. His growing restlessness 
drove him out at night. He grew tall and rangy, and ahyays 
there was the darkness about him. 


CHAPTER 38 

I 

F R 0 M H I s first memory Cal liad craved warmth and affection, 
just as everyone does. If he had been an only child or if Aron 
-had been a different kind of boy, Cal might have achieved his 
relationship normally and easily. But from the very first people . ¦ 
were won instantly to Aron by his beauty and his simplicity. Cal 
very naturally competed for attention and affection’ in the only 
way he knew' -by trying to imitate Aron. And what was charm- ¦ 
ing in the blond ingenuousness of Aron became suspicious and 
unpleasant in the dark-faced, slit-eyed Cal. And since he was' 
pretending, his performance was not convincing. 'Where Aron 
was reccis'cd, Cal was rebuffed for doing or saying exactly tlie 
same thing. 

And as a few snokes on the nose will make a puppy head-shy, 
so a few rebuffs will make a boy shy all over. But whereas a 
puppy will cringe away or roll on its back, grovelling, a little 
boy may cover his shyness with nonchalance, svith bravado, or 
with secrecy. And once a hoy has suffered rejection, he will find , 
rejection even where it does not exist -or, worse, will draw, it , 
fortli from people simply by expecting it. 

In Cal the process had been so long and so slow that he felt 
no strangeness. He had built a wall of self-sufficiency around 
himself, strong enough to defend him against the world. If his 
wall had any weak places they may have been on the sides nearest . ; 
Aron and Lee, and particularly nearest Adam. Perhaps in hh 

418 



father’s very unawareness Cal had felt safety. Not being noticed 
at all was better than being noticed adversely. 

When he was quite small Cal had discovered a secret. If he 
moved very quietly to where his father was sitting and if he 
leaned very lightly against his father’s knee, Adam’s hand 
would rise automatically and his fingers would caress Cal’s 
shoulder. It is probable that Adam did not even know he did it, 
but the caress brought such a raging flood of emotion to the 
boy that he saved this special joy and used it only when he 
needed it. It was a magic to be depended upon. It was the cere- 
monial symbol of a dogged adoration. 

Things do not change with a change of scene. In Salinas, Cal 
had no more friends than he had in King City. Associates he 
had, and authority and some admiration, but friends he did not 
have. He lived alone and walked alone. 

II 

If Lee knew that Cal left the house at night and returned very 
late, he gave no sign, since he couldn’t do anything about it. The 
night constables sometimes saw him walking alone. Chief Heiser- 
man made it a point to speak to the truant officer, who assmed 
him that Cal not only had no record for playing hoolq' but actu- 
ally was a very good student. The chief knew Adam, of course, 
and since Cal broke no windows and caused no disturbance he 
told the constables to keep their eyes open but to let the boy 
alone unless he got into trouble. 

Old Tom Watson caught up with Cal one m'ght and asked, 
‘Why do you walk aroimd so much at night?’ 

‘I’m not bothering anybody,’ said Cal defensively. 

‘I know you’re not. But you ought to be home in bed.’ 

‘I’m. not sleepy,’ said Cal, and this didn’t make any sense at 
all to Old Tom, who couldn’t remember any time in his whole 
life when he wasn’t sleepy. The boy looked in on. the fan-tan 
games in Chinatown, but he didn’t play. It was a mystery, but 
then fairly simple things were mysteries to Tom Watson and he 
preferred to leave them that way. 

On his walks Cal often recalled the conversation between Lee 
and Adam he had heard on the ranch. He wanted to dig out the 
truth. And his knowledge a'ccumulated slowly, a reference heard 
in the street, the gibing talk in the pool-hall. If Aron had 
tlie fragments he would not have noticed,’ but Cal co^^ 

. them. He knew that his mother was not dead kn x 

419 




watched. Seeing Rabbit’s face under the street-lights, Cal knew 
what the watchers at the circus would look like. 

They went through the overgrown yard and up on the un- 
painted porch. Although Cal was tall for his age he walked high 
on his toes. The guardian of the door didn’t look at him very 
closely. The dim room with its low secret lamps and the ner\’Ous 
waiting men concealed his presence. 

Ill 

Always before. Cal had wanted to build a dark accumulation of 
things seen and things heard - a kind of a warehouse of materials 
that, like obscure tools, might come in handy, but after the 
visit to Kate’s he felt a desperate need for help. 

One night Lee, tapping away at his typewriter, heard a quiet 
knock on his door and let Cal in. The boy sat down on the edge 
of the bed, and Lee let his thin body down in the Morris chair. 
He was amused that a chair could give, him so much pleasure. 
Lee folded his hands over his stomach as though he wore 
Chinese sleeves and waited patiently. Cal was looking at a spot 
in the air right over Lee’s head. 

Cal spoke softly and rapidly. T know where my mother is and 
what she’s doing. I saw her.’ 

Lee’s mind was a convulsive prayer for guidance. ‘What do 
you want to know?’ he asked softly. 

‘I- haven’t thought yet. I’m trying to think. Would you tell me 
the truth?’ 

‘Of course.’ 

The questions whirling in Cal’s head were so bewildering he 
had trouble picking one out. ‘Does my father know?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Why did he say she was dead?’ 

‘To save you from pain.’ 

Cal considered. ‘What did my father do to make her leave?’ 

‘He loved her with his whole mind and body. He gave her 
everything he could imagine.’ 

‘Did she shoot him?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Why?’ 

‘Because he didn’t want her to go away.’ 

‘Did he ever hurt her?’ ^ 

‘Not that I know of. It wasn’t in him to hurt her. 

‘Lee, why did she do it?’ 


421 



‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Don’t know or won’t say?’ 

' ‘Don’t know.’ . 

Cal was silent for so long that Lee’s fingers began to creep a 
little, holding to his wrists. He was relieved when Cal spoke 
again. The boy’s tone was different. There was a pleading in it. 

‘Lee, you knew her. What was she like?’ 

Lee sighed and his hands relaxed. ‘I can only say what I 
think. I may be wrong.’ 

‘WeU, what did you think?’ 

‘Cal,’ he said, ‘I’ve thought about it for a great many hours 
- and I still don’t know. She is a mystery. It seems to me that she 
is not like oilier people. There is something she lacks. Kindness 
maybe, or conscience. You can only understand people if you 
feel them in yourself. And I can’t feel her. The moment I think 
about her my feeling goes into darkness. I don’t know what she 
wanted or what she was after. She v'as full of hatred, but why or 
towards what I don’t know. It’s a mystery. And , her hatred 
wasn’t healthy. It wasn't angry. It was heartless. I don’t know 
tliat it is good to talk to you like this.’ 

‘I need to know.’ 

‘Why? Didn’t you feel better before you knew?’ 

‘Yes. But I can’t stop now.’ 

‘You’re right,’ said Lee. ‘When the first innocence goes, you 
can’t stop -unless you’re a hypocrite or a fool. But I can’t teE 
you any more because I don’t know any more.’ 

Cal said, ‘Tell me about my father, then.’ , 

‘That I can do,’ said Lee. He paused. ‘I wonder if anyone can 
hear us talking? Speak softiy.’ 

‘Tell me about him,’ said Cal. 

'I think your father has in him, magnified, the things his wife 
lacks. I think in him kindness and conscience are so large that 
they are almost faults. They trip him up and hinder him.’ ; 

. 'What did he do when she left?’ 

‘He died,’ said Lee. ‘He walked around but he was dead. And 
only recently has he come half to life again.’ Lee saw a strange 
new expression on Cal’s face. The eyes were open wider, and 
the mouth, ordinarily tight and muscular, was relaxed. In his 
face, now for the first time, Lee could see Aron’s face in spite of, 
the different colouring. Cal’s shoulders were shaking a little, like 
a muscle too long held under strain. 

‘What is it?’ Lee asked. 

‘I love him,’ Cal said. 


422 



‘I love him too/ said Lee. ‘I guess I couldn’t have stayed . 
around so long if I hadn’t. He is not smart in a worldly sense, 
but he’s a good man. Maybe the best man I have ever knowm.’ 

Cal stood up suddenly. ‘Good night, Lee/ he said. 

‘Now you just wait a moment. Have you told anyone?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Not Aron — no, of course j’ou wouldn’t.’ 

‘Suppose he finds out?* 

‘Then you’d have to stand by to help him. Don’t go yet. When 
you leave this room we may not be able to talk again. You may 
dislike me for knowing you know the truth. Tell me this -do 
you hate your mother?’ 

‘Yes/ said Cal. ^ 

‘I wonder,’ said Lee, ‘I don’t think your father ever hated her. 
He had only sorrow.’ 

Cal drifted towards the door, slowly, softly. .He shoved his 
fists deep in his pockets. ‘It’s like you said about knowing people. 

I hate her because I know why she went away. I know -because 
I’ve got her in me.’ His head was down and his voice was heart- 
broken. 

Lee jumped up. ‘You stop that!’ he said sharply. ‘You hear 
me? Don’t let me catch you doing that. Of course you may have 
that in you. Everybody has. But you’ve got the other too. Here - 
lookup! Look at me!’ 

Cal raised his head and said wearily, “What do you want?’ 

•You’ve got the other too. Listen to me! You wouldn’t even 
be wondering if you didn’t have it. Don’t you dare take the lazy 
way. It’s too easy to excuse yourself because of your ancestry. 
Don’t let me catch you doing it ! Now - look close at me so j'ou 
will remember. Whatever you do, it will be you who do it -not 
3'our mother.’ 

¦ ‘Do you believe that, Lee?’ 

‘Yes, I believe it, and you’d better believe it or I’ll break every 
bone in your body.’ 

After Cal had gone Lee went back to his chair. He thought 
ruefully, ‘I wont^er what happened to my Oriental repose.’ 


Cal’s discovery of his mother was more a verification than a nav 
thing to him. For a long time he had known without details 
that the cloud was there. And his reaction was twofold. He had 
an almost pleasant sense of power in knowing, andJie^couId 

423 



evaluate actions and expressions, could interpret vague refer- 
ences, could even dip up and reorganize the past. But these did 
not compensate for the pain in his knowledge. 

' His body was rearranging itself towards manhood, and he was 
qViaken by tlte veering winds of adolescence. One moment he was 
, dedicated and pure and devoted; tlie next he wallowed Jn filth; 
and the next he grovelled in shame and emerged re-dedicated. 

¦ His discovery sharpened all of his emotions. It seemed to him 
that he was unique, having such a heritage. He could not quite 
believe Lee’s words or conceive that other boys were going 
through the same thing. 

, The circus at Kate’s remained with him. At one moment the 
memory inflamed his mind and body with pubescent fire, and 
the next moment nauseated him with revulsion and loathing. 

He looked at his father more closely and saw perhaps more 
sadness and frustration in Adam than may have been there. And 
in Cal there grew up a passionate love for his father and a wish, 
to protect him and to make up to him for the things he had 
suffered. In Cal’s own sensitized mind that suffering was un- 
bearable. He blundered into the bathroom while Adam was bath- 
ing and saw the ugly bullet scar and heard himself ask against 
his will, ‘Father, what’s that scar?’ 

Adam’s fingers went up as though to conceal the scar. He 
said, ‘It’s an old wnund, Cal. I was in the Indian campaigns. I’ll 
tell you about it some time.’ 

Cal, watching Adam’s face, had seen his mind leap into tlte 
past for a lie. Cal didn't hate the lie but the necessity for telling 
it. Cal lied for reasons of profit of one kind or another. To be 
\ driven to a lie seemed shameful to him. He wanted to shout, *1 
know how you got it and it’s all right.’ But, of course, he did 
not. ‘I’d like to hear about it,’ he said. 

Aron was caught in the roil of change too, but lus impulses 
were more sluggish than Cal’s. His body did not scream at liim 
' so shrilly. His passions took a religious direction. He decided on 
the ministry for his future. He attended all services in the 
Episcopal church, helped with the flowers and leaves at feast ' 
times, and spent many hours with the young and curly-haired 
clergyman, Mr Rolf. Aron’s training in worldUness was gained 
from a yotmg man of no experience, which gave him the ability 
for generalization only the inexperienced can have. 

Aron was confirmed in the Episcopal church and took his 
place in the choir on Sundays. Abra followed him. Her feminine 
mind knew such things were necessary but unimportant, 

424 


It was natural that the convert Aron should work on Cal. 
First Aron prayed silently for Cal, but finally he approached 
him. He denounced Cal’s godlessness, demanded his reforma- 
tion. 

Cal might have tried to go along if his brother had been more 
clever. But Aron had reached a point of passionate purity that 
made everyone else foul. After a few lectures Cal found him un- 
bearably smug and told him so. It was a relief to both of them 
when Aron abandoned his brother to eternal damnation. 

Aron’s religion inevitably took a sexual turn. He spoke to 
Abra of the necessity for abstinence and decided that he would 
live a life of celibacy. Abra in her wisdom, agreed with him, feel- 
ing and hoping that this phase would pass. Celibacy was the 
only state she had known. She wanted to marry Aron and bear 
any number of his children, but for the time being she did not 
sprak of it. She had never been jealous before, but now she began 
to find in herself an instinctive and perhaps justified hatred for 
the Reverend Air Rolf. 

Cal watched his brother triiunph over .sins he had never com- 
mitted. He thought sardom'caUy of telling him about his mother, 
to see how he would handle it, but he withdreiv the thought 
quickly. He didn’t think Aron could handle it at all. 


CHAPTER 39 

I 

At intervals Salinas suffered from a mild eructation of 
morality. 'The process never varied much. One biurst was like 
another. Sometimes it started in the pulpit and sometimes with 
a new ambitious president of the Women’s Civic Club. Gamb- 
ling was invariably the sin to be eradicated. There were certain 
advantages in attacking gambling. One could discuss it, which 
was not true of prostitution. It was an obvious evil and most of 
the games were operated by Chinese. There was little chance of 
treading on the toes of a relative. 

From church and club the town’s two newspapers caught fire. 
Editorials demanded a clean-up. The police agreed but pleaded 
short-handedness and tried for increased budget and somenmes 
succeeded. 

When it got to the editorial stage everyone krrw th 

425 



were down. What followed was as carefully produced as a ballet. 
The police got ready, die gambling houses got r^d 3 ', and the 
papers set up congratulatory editorials in advance. Then came 
the raid, deliberate and sure. Twenty or more Chinese, imported 
from Pajaro, a few bums, six or eight drummers, who, being 
strangers, were not warned, fell into the police net, were booked, 
jailed, and in the morning fined and released. The town relaxed 
in its new spodessness and the houses lost only one night of busi- 
ness plus the fines. It is one of the triumphs of the human that 
he can know a thing and still not believe it. 

In the autumn of 1916 Cal was watching the fan-tan game at 
Shorty Lim’s one night when the raid scooped him up. In the 
dark no one noticed him, and the Chief w'as embarrassed to find 
him in the tank in the morning. The Chief telephoned Adam, 
got him up from his breakfast. Adam walked the two blocks to 
the City Hall, picked up Cal, crossed the street to the post ofEcx 
for his mail, and then the two walked home. 

Lee had kept Adam’s eggs warm and had fried two for Cal. 

Aron walked through the dining-room on his way to school. 
‘Want me to wait for you ? ’ he asked Cal. 

‘No,’ said Cal. He kept his eyes down and ate his eggs. 

Adam had not spoken except to say, ‘Come along!’ at the City 
Hall after he had thanked the Chief. 

Cal gulped down a breakfast he did not want, darting glances 
up through his ej’dashcs at his father’s face. He could make 
nothing of Adam’s e.xpression. It seemed at once puzzled and 
angry and thoughtful and sad. 

Adam stared down into his coffee-cup. The silence grew until 
it had the weight of age so hard to lift aside. 

Lee looked in. ‘Coffee?’ he asked. 

Adam shook his head slowty. Lee withdrew and this time 
closed the kitchen door. 

In the clock-ticking silence Cal began to be afraid. He felt a 
strength flowing out of his father he had never known tyas 
there. Itching prickles of agony ran up his legs, and he was 
afraid to move to restore the circulation. He knocked his fork, 
against his plate to make a noise and the clatter was swallowed 
up. The clock struck nine deliberate strokes and they were swal- 
lowed up. 

As the fear began to chfll, resentment took its place. So might 
a trapped fox feel anger at the paw which held him to the trap. 

Suddenly Cal jumped up. He hadn’t known he was going .to 
move. He shouted and he hadn’t known he was going to speak. 

426 


He cried, ‘Do what you’re going to do to me! Go ahead! Get it 
over ! ’ 

And his shout was sucked into the silence. 

Adam slowly raised his head. It is true Cal had never looked 
into his father’s eyes before, and it is true that many people 
never look into their father’s eyes. Adam’s irises were light blue 
with dark lines leading into the vortices of the pupils. And deep 
down in each pupil 01 saw his own face reflected, as though 
two Cals looked out at him. 

Adam said slowly, Tve failed you, haven’t I?’ 

It was tvorse than an attack. ^1 faltered, ‘What do you 
mean?’ 

‘You were picked up in a gambling house. I don’t know 
how you got there, what you were doing there, why you went 
there.’ . 

Cal sat limply down and looked at his plate. 

‘Do you gamble, son?’ 

‘No, sir. I was just watching.’ 

‘Had you been there before?’ 

‘Yes, sir. Many times.’ 

“Why do you go?’ 

‘I don’t Imow. I get restless at night - like an alley cat, I guess.’ 
He thought of Kate and his weak joke seemed horrible to him. 
‘When I can’t sleep I walk around,’ he said, ‘to try to blot it 
out.’ 

Adam considered his words, inspected each one. ‘Does your 
brother walk around too?’ 

‘Oh, no, sir. He wouldn’t think of it. He’s - he’s not restless.’ 

‘You see, I don’t know,’ said Adam. ‘I don’t know an 5 rthing 
about you.’ 

Cal wanted to throw his arms about his father, to hug him 
and to be hugged by- him. He wanted some wild demonstration 
of sympathy and love. He picked up his wooden napkin ring 
and thrust his forefinger through it. ‘I’d tell you if you asked, •• 
he said softly. 

‘I didn’t ask, I didn’t ask! I’m as bad a father as my father 
was.’ 

. Cal had never heard this tone in Adam’s voice. It was hoarse 
and breaking with warmth and he fumbled among his words, 

feeling for them in the dark. ... 

‘My father made a mould and forced me into it, Adam sai . 

‘I was a bad casting but I couldn’t be re-rnelted. Nobody can be^ 
re-melted. And so I remained a bad casting. 

427 



Cal said, ‘Sir, don’t be sorry. You’ve had too much of that,’ 

‘Have I? Maybe -but maybe the WTong kind. I don’t know 
my sons. I wonder whether I could leam.’ 

‘I’ll tell you anything you want to know. Just ask me.’ 

¦Where would I start? Right at the beginning?’ 

‘Are you sad or mad because I was in jail?’ 

To Cal’s surprise Adam laughed. ‘You were just there, weren’t 
you? You didn’t do nothing wrong.’ 

‘Maybe being there was wrong.’ Cal wanted a blame for him- 
self. 

‘One time I was just there,’ said Adam. ‘I was a prisoner for 
nearly a year for just being there.’ 

Cal tried to absorb this heresy. ‘I don’t believe it,’ he said, 

‘Sometimes I don’t either, but I know that when I escaped .1 
robbed a store and stole some clothes.’ 

‘I don’t believe it,’ Cal said weakly, but tlie warmth, the close- 
ness, was so delicious that he clung to it. He breathed shallowly 
so that the warmth might not be dismrbed. 

Adam said, ‘Do you remember Samuel Hamilton? - sure you 
do. When you were a baby he told me I was a bad father. He hit 
me, knocked me down, to impress it on me.’ 

‘That old man?’ 

‘He was a tough old man. And now I know what he meant. 
I’m the same as my fathei- was. He didn’t allow me to be a per- 
son, and I ha%'en’t seen my sons as people. That’s what Samuel 
meant.’ He looked right into Cal’s eyes and smiled, and Cal 
ached with affection for him. 

Cal said, ‘We don’t think you’re a bad father.’ 

‘Poor things,’ said Adam. ‘How could you know? You’ve 
never had any other kind.’ 

‘I’m glad I was in jail,’ said Cal. v 

‘So am I. So am I.’ He laughed. ‘We’ve both been in jail -we 
can talk together.’ A gaiety grew in him. ‘Maybe you can tell me 
what kind of a boy you are- can you?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘Will you?’ 

‘Yes, sir,’ 

‘Well, tell me. You see, there’s a responsibility in being a per- 
son. It’s more than just taking up space where air would be. 
What are you like?’ 

‘No joke?’ Cal asked shyly. 

‘No joke -oh, surely, no joke. Tell me about yourself - that is, 
if you want to.' 


428 


Cal began, ‘Well - I’m — ’ He stopped. ‘It’s not so easy when 
you try,’ he said. 

‘I guess it would be -maybe impocsible. Tell me about your 
brother.’ 

‘What do you want to know about him?’ 

‘What you think of him, I guess. That’s all you cxiuld tell me.’ 

Cal said, ‘He’s good. He doesn’t do bad things. He doesn’t 
think bad things.’ 

‘Now you’re telling me about yourself.’ 

‘Sir?’ 

‘You’re saying you do and think bad things.’ 

Cal’s cheeks reddened. ‘WeU, I do.’ 

‘Very bad things?’ 

‘Yes, sir. Do you want me to tell?’ 

‘No, Cal. You’ve told. Your voice tells and your eyes tell 
you’re at war with yourself. But you shouldn’t be ashamed. It’s 
awful to be ashamed. Is Aron ever ashamed?’ 

‘He doesn’t do anything to be ashamed of.’ 

Adam leaned forward. ‘Are you sure?’ ^ 

‘Pretty sure.’ 

‘Tell me. Cal - do you protect him?’ 

‘How do you mean, sir?’ 

-‘I mean lilte this -if you heard something bad or cruel or 
ugly, would you keep it from him?’ 

‘I - 1 think so.’ 

‘You think he’s too weak to bear things you can bear?’ 

‘It’s not that, sir. He’s good. He’s really good. He never does 
anyone harm. He never says bad things about anyone. He’s not 
mean and he never complains and he’s brave. He doesn’t like to 
fight but he will.’ 

‘You love your brother, don’t you?’ 

‘Yes, sir. And I do bad things to him. I cheat him and I fool 
him. Sometimes I hurt him for no reason at all.’ 

‘And then you’re miserable?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘Is Aron e\'er miserable?’ 

‘I don’t Imow. When I didn’t want to Join the Church he felt 
bad. And once when Abra got angry and said she hated him he 
felt awful bad. He was sick. He had fever. Don’t you remem- 
ber? Lee sent for the doctor.’ 

Adam said with wonder, ‘I could live with you and not know 
any pf these things ! Why was Abra mad?’ 

Cal said, ‘I don’t know if I ought to tell.’ 

429 



‘I don’t want you to, then.’ - ' . 

‘Ifs nothing bad. I guess it’s all right. You see, sir, Aron wants 
to be a minister. Mr Rolf- well, he likes High Church, and Aron 
liked that, and he thought maybe he would never get manricd 
¦ and maybe go to a retreat.’ 

^ ..‘Like a monk, you mean?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘And Abra didn’t like that?’ 

‘Like it? She got spitting mad. She can get mad sometimes. 
She, took Aron’s fountain pen and threw it on the sidetvalk and 
tramped on it. She said she’d wasted half her life on Aron.’ 

Adam laughed. ‘How old is Abra?’ 

. ‘Nearly fifteen. But she’s -well, more than that some ways.’ 

' ‘I should say she is. What did Aron do?’ 

‘He just got quiet but he fdt awful bad.’ 

• Adam said, ‘I guess you could have taken her away from him 
then.'’ 

'Abra is Aron’s girl,’ said Cal. 

Adam looked deeply into Cal’s eyes. Then he called, ‘Lee!’ 
There was no answer. ‘Lee!’ he called again. He said, 'I didn’t 
hear him go out. I want some fresh coffee.’ 

Cal jumped up. ‘Fll make it.’ 

‘Say,’ said Adam, ‘you should be in school.’ 

‘I don’t want to go.’ 

‘You ought to go. Aron went.’ 

‘I’m happy,’ Cal said. ‘I want to be with you.’ 

Adam looked down at his hands. ‘Make the coffee,’ he said 
softly, and his voice was shy. ’ \ ' 

When Cal was in the kitchen Adam looked inward at himself 
with wonder. His nerves and muscles throbbed with an ^excited 
hunger. His fingers yearned to grasp, his legs to run. His eyes 
avidly brought the room into focus. He saw the chairs,' the pic- 
times, the red roses on the carpet, and new sharp things -almost 
people things but friendly things. And in liis brain was born 
sharp appetite for the future -a pleased warm anticipation, as 
though the coming minutes and weeks must bring delight. He 
felt a dawn emotion, with a lovely day to slip golden and quiet 
over him. He laced his fingers behind his head and stretched his 
legs out stiff. 

In the kitchen Cal trrged on the water heating in the coffee- 
pot, and yet he was pleased to be waiting. A miracle once it h 
familiar is no longer a miracle; Cal had lost his wonder at the 
golden relationship with his father but the pleasure remained. , 

430 


The poison of loneliness and the gnawing envy of the unlonely 
had gone out of him, and his person was clean and sweet, and he 
knew it was. He dredged up an old hatred to test himself, and 
he foimd the hatred gone. He wanted to serve his father, to give 
him some great gift, to perform some huge task in honour of his 
father. 

The coffee boiled over and Cal spent minutes cleaning up the 
stove. He said to himself, ‘I wouldn’t have done this yesterday.’ 

Adam smiled at him when he carried in the steaming pot. 
Adam sniffed and said, ‘That’s a smell could raise me out of a 
concrete grave.’ 

‘It boiled over,’ said Cal. 

‘It has to boil over to taste good,’ Adam said. ‘I wonder where 
Lee went.’ 

‘Maybe to his room. Shall I look?’ 

‘No. He’d have answered.’ 

‘Sir, when I finish school, wiU you let me nm the ranch?’ 

‘You’re planning early. How about Aron?’ 

‘He wants to go to college. Don’t tell him I told you. Let him 
tell you, and 3'ou be surprised.’ 

‘Why, that’s fine,’ said Adam. ‘But don’t you want to go to 
college too?’ 

‘I bet I could make money on the ranch -enough to pay 
Aron’s way through college.’ 

Adam sipped his coffee. ‘That’s a generous thing,’ he said. ‘I 
don’t know whether I ought to tell you this, but - well, when I 
asked j^ou earlier what kind of boy Aron was, you defended him 
so badly I thought you might dislike him or even hate him.’ 

‘I have hated him,’ Cal said vehemently. ‘And I’ve hurt him 
too. But, sir, can I tell you something? I don’t hate him now. I 
won’t ever hate him again. I don’t think I will hate anyone, not 
even my mother — ’ He stopped, astonished at his slip, and his 
mind froze up tight and helpless. 

Adam looked straight ahead. He rubbed his forehead with the 
palm of his hand. Finally Jie said quietly, ‘You know about j'our 
mother.’ It was not a question. 

‘Yes — yes, sir. 

‘All about her?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

Adam leaned back in his chair. ‘Does Aron know?’ 

‘Oh, no ! No — no, sir. He doesn’t know.’ 

‘Why do you say it that way?’ 

‘I wouldn’t dare to tell him.’ 


431 



' ‘Why not?’ . . ' 

• Cal said brokenly, ‘I don’t think he could stand it. He Iiasn’t 
enough badness in hte to stand it.’ He wanted to, continue, 
. ‘-any more than you could, sir/ but he left the last unsaid. 

Adam’s face looked weary. He moved his head from side to 
side. ‘Cal, listen'to me. Do you think there’s any chance of keep- 
ing Aron from knowing? Think carefully.’ 

Cal said, ‘He doesn’t go near places like that. He’s not like me.’^ 

‘Suppose someone told him?’ ", 

‘I don’t think he would believe it, sir. I think he would lick 
whoever told him and think ft was a lie.’ 

'You’ve been there?’ 

“Yes, sir. I had to know.’ And Cal went on excitedly, ‘If he 
went away to college and never lived in this town again — ’ • 

Adam nodded. ‘Yes. That might be. But he has two more 
years, here.’ 

‘Maybe I could make him hurry it up and finish in one year. 
He’s smart.’ 

‘But you’re smarter?’ 

‘A different kind of smart,’ said Cal. 

Adam seemed to grow until he filled one side of the room. His 
face was stern and his blue eyes sharp and penetrating. ‘Cal! ’ he 
said harshly. 

‘Sir?’ 

T trust you, son,’ said Adam. 


II 

Adam’s recognition brought a ferment of happiness to Cal. He 
walked on the balls of his feet. He smiled more often than he 
frowned, and the secret darkness was seldom on him. 

Lee, noticing the change in him, asked quietly, ‘You haven’t 
found a girl, have you?’ 

‘Girl? No. Who wants a girl?’ 

‘Everybody,’ said Lee. 

'And Lee asked Adam, ‘Do you know what’s got intojZal?’ 

Adam said, ‘He knows about her.’ 

‘Does he?’ Lee stayed out of trouble. ‘Well, you remember I 
thought you should have told them.’ 

‘I didn’t tell him. He knew.’ 

‘What do you think of that!’ said Lee. ‘But that’s not informa- 
tion to make a boy hum when he studies and play catch with his 
cap when he walks. How about Aron?’ 

432 



‘I’m afraid of that,’ said Adam. ‘I don’t think I want him to 
loiow.’ 

‘It might be too late.’ 

‘I might have a talk with Aron. Kind of feel around.’ 

Lee considered. ‘Something’s happened to 5'ou too.’ 

' ‘Has it? I guess it has,’ said Adam. 

But humming and sailing his cap, driving quickly through 
his school work, were only the smallest of Cal’s activities. In his 
new joy he appointed himself guardian of his father’s content. It 
was true what he had said about not feeling hatred for his 
mother. But that did not change the fact that she had been the 
instrument of Adam’s hurt and shame. Cal reasoned that what 
she could do before, she could do again. He set himself to learn 
all he could about her. A known enemy is less dangerous, less 
able to surprise. 

At night he was drawn to the house across the tracks. Some- 
times in the afternoon he lay hidden in the tall weeds across the 
street, watching the place. He saw the girls come out, dressed 
sombrely, even severely. They left the house always in pairs, and 
Cal followed them with his eyes to the corner of Castroville 
Street, where they turned left towards Main Street. He dis- 
covered that if you didn’t know where they had come from you 
couldn’t tell what they were. But he was not waiting for the 
girls to come out. He wanted to see his mother in the light of 
day. He found that Kate emerged every Monday at one-thirty. 

Cal made arrangements in school, by doing extra and excel- 
lent work, to make up for his absences on Monday afternoons. 
To Aron’s questions he replied that he was working on a sur- 
prise and was duty bound to tell no one. Aron was not much 
interested an3nvay. In his self-immersion Aron soon forgot the 
whole thing. 

Cal, after he had followed Kate several times, loiew her route. 
She always went to the same places - first to the Monterey 
County Bank, where she was admitted behind the shining bars 
that defended the safe-deposit vault. She spent fifteen or twenty 
minutes there. Then she moved slowly along Main Street, look- 
ing in the store windows. She stepped into Porter and Irvine’s 
and looked at dresses and sometimes made a purchase— elastic, 
safety pins, a veil, a pair of gloves. About two-fifteen she en- 
tered Mirmie Franken’s beauty parlour, stayed an hour, and 
came out with her hair pinned up in tight curls and a silk scarf 
around her head and tied under her chin. 

At three-thirty she climbed the stairs to the offices over the 

' 433 



Fanner’s Mercantile and went into the consulting-room. of Dr 
Rosen. When she came down from the doctor’s office she 
stopped for a moment at Bell’s candy store and bought a two- 
pound box of mixed chocolates. She nev'er varied the route. 
•Prom Bell’s she went directly back to Castroville Street and 
thence to her house. 

There was nothing strange about her clothing. She dressed 
exactly like any well-to-do Salinas woman out shopping on a 
Monday afternoon -except that she always wore gloves, which 
was tmusual for Salinas. 

The gloves made her hands seem puffed and pudgy. She 
moved as though she were surrounded by a glass shell. She spoke 
to no one and seemed to see no one. Occasionally a man turned 
and looked after her arid then nervously went about his business. 
But for the most part she slipped past like an invisible woman. 

For a number of weeks Cat followed Kate. He tried not to 
attract her attention. And since Kate walked always looking 
straight ahead, he was convinced that she did not notice him. , 

When Kate entered her own yard Cal strolled casually by 
and went home by another route. He could not have said exactly 
why he followed her, except that he wanted to know all about 
her. 

The eighth week he took the route she completed her journey 
and went into her overgrown yard as usual. 

Cal waited a moment, then strolled past the rickety gate. 

Kate was standing behind a tall ragged privet. She said to him 
coldly, ‘What do you want?’ 

Cal froze in Iris steps. He was suspended in time, barely 
breathing. Then he began a practice he had learned when he was 
very young. He observed and catalogued details outside his main 
object. He noticed how the wind from the south bent over the 
new little leaves of the tall privet bush. He saw the muddy path 
beaten to black mush by many feet, and Kate’s feet standmg far 
to the side out of the mud. He heard a switch engine in the 
Southern Pacific yards discharging steam in shrilly drj' spurts. 
He felt the chill air on the growing fuzz on his cheeks. And all 
the time he w'as staring at Kate and she was staring back at him. 
And he saw in the set and colour of her eyes and hair, even in 
the way she held her shoulders — high in a kind of semi-shrug - 
that Aron looked very like her. He did not know his own face 
well enough to recognize her mouth and little teeth and wide 
cheekbones as his own. They stood thus for a moment, between 
two gusts of the southern wind. 

434 



Kate said, ‘This isn’t the first time you’ve followed me. What 
do you want?’ 

He dipped liis head. ‘Nothing,’ he said. 

‘Who told you to do it?’ she demanded. 

‘Nobody - ma’am.’ 

‘You won’t tell me, will you ?’ 

Cal heard his own speech with amazement. It was out before 
he could stop it. ‘You’re my mother and I wanted to see what 
you’re like.’ It was the exact truth and it had leaped out like the 
stroke of a snake. 

‘What? What is this? Who are you?’ 

‘I’m Cal Trask,’ he said. He felt the delicate change of balance 
as when a seesaw moves. His was the upper seat now. Although 
her expression had not changed Cal knew she was on the de- 
fensive. 

She looked at him closely, observed every feature. A dim re- 
membered picture of Charles leaped into her mind. Suddenly 
she said, ‘Come with me!’ She turned and walked up the path, 
keepiiig well to the side, out of the mud. 

hesitated only for a moment before following her up the 
steps. He remembered the big dim room, but the rest was strange 
to him. Kate preceded him down a hall and into her room. 
As she went past the kitchen entrance she called, ‘Tea. Two 
cups I’ 

In her room she seemed to have forgotten him. She removed 
her coat, tugging at the sleeves with reluctant fat gloved fingers. 
Then she went to a new door cut in the wall in the end of the 
room where her bed stood. She opened the door and went into a 
new little lean-to. ‘Come in here!’ she said. ‘Bring that chair 
with you.’ 

He followed her into a box of a room. It had no windov/s, no 
decorations of any kind. Its walls were painted a dark gre}'. A 
solid grey carpet covered the floor. The only furniture in the 
room ivas a huge chair puffed with grey silk cushions, a 
reading-table, and a floor-lamp deeply hooded. Kate pulled ie 
light chain with hCT gloved hand, holding it deep in the 
between her thumb and forefinger as though her hand 
artificial. 

‘Close the door ! ’ Kate said. 

The light threw a circle on the reading-table and cnT'' ' 
dimly through the grey room. Indeed the grey ' 

suck up the light and destroy it, 

Kate settled herself gingerly among the thin: ' , 

435 


and slowly removed her gloves. The fingers of both hands were 
bandaged. - , ¦ . • . 

Kate.said angrdy, 'Dbn’t stare. It’s arthritis. Oh-so you want 
to see, do you?’ She unwrapped the oily-looking bandage from 
. her right forefinger and stuck the crooked finger under the light. 
‘There- look at it,’ she said. 'It’s arthritis.' She whined in pain 
as she tenderly WTapped the bandage loosely. ‘God, those gloves 
hurt ! ’she said, ‘Sit down.’ 

Cal crouched on the edge of his chair. 

‘You’ll probably get it,’ Kate said. ‘My great-aunt had it and 
my mother was just beginning to get it — ’ She stopped. The 
room was very silent. 

There was a soft knock on the door. Kate called, ‘Is that you, 
Joe? Set the tray down out there. Joe, are you there?’ 

A mutter came through the door. 

Kate said tonelessly, ‘There’s a litter in the parlour. Clean it 
up. Anne hasn’t cleaned her room. Give her one more warning. 
TeU her it’s the last. Eva got smart last night. I’ll take care of 
her. And, Joe, tell the cook if he sen'es carrots again this wed: 
he can pack up. Hear me?’ 

The mutter came through the door. 

‘That’s all,’ said Kate. ‘The dirty pigs ! ’ she muttered. ‘They’d 
rot if I didn’t watch tliem. Go out and bring in the tea 
tray. 

The bedroom was empty when Cal opened the door. He car- 
ried the tray into the lean-to and set it gingerly on the tilted 
reading-table. It was a large silver tray, and on it were a pewter 
teapot, two paper-thin white tea-cups, sugar, cream, and an open 
box of chocolates. 

‘Pour the tea,’ said Kate. 'It hurts my Itands.’ She put a 
chocolate in her mouth. ‘I saw you looking at this room,’ she 
went on when she had swullowed her candy. ‘The light hurts my 
eyes. I come in her to rest.’ She saw Cal’s quick ^ance at her. 
eyes and said with finality, ‘The light hurts my eyes.’ She said 
harshly, ‘What’s the matter? Don’t you WTint tea?’ 

‘No, ma’am,’ said Cal. ‘I don’t bke tea.’ 

She held the thin cup with her bandaged fingers. ‘All right. 
What do you want?’ 

‘Nothing, ma’am.’ 

‘Just wanted to look at me?’ 

‘Yes, ma’am.’ 

‘Are you satisfied?’ 

‘Yes, ma’am.’ 


436 



‘How do I look?’ She smiled crookedly at him and showed her 
sharp white little teeth. 

‘All right.’ 

‘I might have known you’d cover up. Where’s your brother?’ 

‘In school, I guess, or home.’ 

‘What’s he like?’ 

‘He looks more like you.’ 

‘Oh, he does? WeU, is he like me?’ 

‘He wants to be a minister,’ said Cal. 

‘I guess that’s the way it should be -looks like me and wants 
to go into the Church. A man can do a lot of damage in the 
Church. When someone comes here he’s got his guard up. But 
in church a man’s wide open.’ 

.‘He means it,’ said Cal. 

She leaned towards him, and her face was alive witjti interest. 
‘Fill my cup. Is your brother dull?’ 

‘He’s nice,’ said Cal. 

‘I asked you if he’s dull.’ 

‘No, ma’am,’ said Cal. 

She settled back and lifted her cup. ‘How’s your father?’ 

'I don’t want to talk about him,’ OI said. 

‘Oh, no ! You like him then?’ 

‘I love him,’ said Cal. 

Kate peered closely at him, and a curious spasm shook her- 
an aching twist rose in her chest. And then she closed up and 
her control came hack. 

‘Don’t you want some candy?’ she asked. 

‘Yes, ma’am. Why did you do it?’ 

‘Why did I do what?’ 

‘Why did you shoot my father and run away from us?’ 

‘Did he tell you that?’ 

‘No. He didn’t tell us.’ 

She touched one hand with the other and her hands leaped 
apart as though the contact burned them. She asked, ‘Does your 
father ever have any- girls or young women come to your 
house?’ 

‘No,’ said Cal. ‘Why did you shoot him and go away?’ 

Her cheeks tightened and her mouth straightened, as though » 
a net of muscles took control. She raised her head, and her ej’cs 
were cold and shallow. 

‘You talk older than your age,’ she said. ‘But 3'ou don’t talk 
old enough. Alaybe you’d better run along and plaj* — and wipe 
j'our nose.’ 


437 


¦ ‘Sometimes I work my brother over,’ he said. ‘I make him 
squirm. I've made him cry. He doesn’t know how I do it. I’m 
smarter than he is. I don’t want to do it; It makes me sick.’. 

Kate picked it up as though it were her own conversation. 
‘They thought they were so smart,’ she said, ‘They looked at me 
and thought they knew about me. And I fooled them. I fooled 
every one of them. And when they thought they cotrld tell me 
what to do - oh ! that’s when I fooled them best. Charles, I really 
fooled them then.’ ^ , 

‘My name is Caleb,’ Cal said. ‘Caleb got to the Promised 
Land. That’s what Lee says, and it’s in the Bible.’ 

‘That’s the Chinaman,’ Kate said, and she went on eagerly, 
‘Adam thought he had me. When I was hurt, all broken up, he 
took me in and he waited on me, cooked for me. He tried to tie- 
me down that way. Most people get tied down that way; Thej’’re 
grateful, they’re in debt, and that’s the worst kind of handcuffs. 
But nobody can hold me. I waited and waited imtil I was strong 
and then I broke out. Nobody can trap me,’ she said. ‘I knew 
what he was doing. I waited.’ 

The grey room was silent except for her excited wheezing 
breath. 

Cal said, ‘Why did you shoot him ?’ 

‘Because he tried to stop me, I could have killed him but 1 
didn’t. I just wanted him to let me go.’ . 

‘Did you ever wish you’d stayed?’ 

‘Christ, no ! Even when I was a little girl I could do ahjuhing 
I wanted. They never knew how I did it. Never. They were 
always so sure they were right. And they never knew -no one 
ever knew.’ A kind of realization came to her. ‘Sure, you’re my 
kind. Maybe you’re the same. Why wouldn’t you be?’ 

Cal stood up and closed his hands behind his back. He said, 
‘When you were little, did you’ - he paused to get the thought 
•straight -‘did you ever have the feeling like you were missing 
something? Like as if the others knew something you didn’t - 
like a secret they wouldn’t tell you? Did j-ou ever feel that 
way?’ 

While he spoke her face began to close against him, and by 
. the time he paused she was cut off and the way open between 
them was blocked. 

She said, ‘What am I doing, talking to kids ! ’ 

Cal unclasped his hands from behind him and shoved them • 
in his pockets. 

‘Talking to snot-nosed kids,’ she said. ‘I must be crazj'.’ 

438 



Cal’s face was alight with excitement, and his eyes were wide 
with vision. 

Kate said, ‘What’s the matter with you?’ 

He stood stdl, his forehead glistening with sweat, his hands 
clenched into fists. 

Kate, as she had always, drove in the smart but senseless knife 
of her cruelty. She laughed sof%. ‘I may have given you some 
interesting things, like this — ’ She held up her crooked hands. 
‘But if it’s epilepsy - fits - you didn’t get it from me.’ She 
glanced brightly up at him, anticipating the shock and beginning 
worry in him. 

Cal spoke happily. ‘I’m going,’ he said. ‘I’m going now. It’s 
all right. What Lee said was true.’ 

‘What did Lee say?’ 

Cal said, ‘I was afraid I had you in me.’ 

‘You have,’ said Kate. 

‘No, I haven’t. I’m my own. I don’t have to be you.’ 

‘How do you know that?’ she demanded. 

‘I just know. It came to me whole. If I’m mean, it’s my own 
mean.’ 

‘This Chinaman has really fed you some pap. What are you 
looking at me like that for?’ 

Cal said, ‘I don’t think the light hurts your eyes. I think 
you’re afraid.' 

‘Get out ! ’ she cried. ‘Go on, get out ! ’ 

‘I’m going.’ He had his hand on the door-knob. ‘I don’t hate 
you,’ he said. ‘But I’m glad you’re afraid.’ 

She tried to shout ‘Joe!’ but her voice thickened to a croak. 

Cal wrenched open the door and slammed it behind him. 

Joe was tailsing to one of the girls in the parlour. They heard 
the smtter of light quick foosteps. But by the time they looked 
up a streaking figure had reached the door, opened it, slipped 
, tlirough, and the heavy front door banged. There -was only one 
step on the porch and then a crunch as jumping feet struck 
earth. 

‘What in hell was that?’ the girl asked. 

‘God knows,’ said Joe. ‘Sometimes I think Tm seeing things.’ 

‘Me too,’ said the girl. ‘Did I tell you Clara's got bugs under 
her skin?’ 

‘I guess she seen the shadow of the needle,’ said Joe. ‘Well, the 
way I figure, tire less you Imow, the better off you. are.’ 

‘That’s the truth you said there,’ the girl agreed. 


439 



CHAPTER 40 


I 

Kate sat back in her chair against the deep down cushions. 
Waves of nert'es cruised over her body, raising the little hairs 
and making ridges of icy bum as they went. 

She spoke softly to herself. ‘Steady now,’ she said. 'Quiet 
down. Don’t let it hit you. Don’t thi^ for a while. The god- 
dam snot-nose!’ 

She thought suddenly of the only person who had ever made 
her feel this panic hatred. It was Samuel Hamilton, with liis 
white beard and his pink cheeks and the laugliing eyes tliat 
lifted her skin and looked underneath. 

With herijandaged forefinger she dug out a slender chain 
which hung around her neck and pulled the chain’s burden up 
from her bodice. On the chain were strung two safe-deposit 
keys, a gold watch with a fleur-dc-lis pin, and a little steel tube, 
tvith a ring on its top. Very carefully she unscretved the top 
from the tube and, spreading her knees, shook out a' gelatine 
capsule. She held the capsule under the light and saw the white 
crystals inside - six grains of morphine, a good, sure margin. 
Very gently she eased the capsule into its tube, screwed on the 
cap, and dropped the chain inside her dress. 

Cal’s last words had been repeating themselves over and over 
in her head. ‘I think you’re afraid,’ She said the words aloud to 
herself to kill the sound. The rhythm stopi^ed, but a strong pic- 
ture formed in her mind and she let it form so that she could 
inspect it again. c. 

1 1 

It was before the lean-to was built. Kate had collected the money 
Charles had left. The cheque was converted to large notes and 
the notes in their bales were in the safe-deposit box at the Mon- 
terey County Bank. 

It was about the time the first pains began to twist her hands. 
There was enough money now to go away. It was just a matter 
of getting the most she could out of the house. But also it was 
better to wait until she felt quite well again. 

She never felt quite well again. New York seemed cold and 
very far away. 


440 



A letter came to her signed ‘Ethel’. Who the hell was Ethel? 
Whoev’er she was^ she must be crazy to ask for money. Ethel - 
there were hundreds of Ethels. Ethels grew on every bush. And 
this one scrawled illegibly on a lined pad. 

Not very long afterwards Ethel came to see Kate, and Kate 
hardly recognized her. 

Kate sat at her desk, watchful, suspicious, and confident. ‘It’s 
been a long time,’ she said. 

Ethel responded like a soldier who comes in his cushion age 
upon the sergeant who trained him. ‘I’ve been poorly,’ she said. 
Her flesh had thickened and grown heavy aU over her. Her 
¦ clothes had the strained cleanliness that means poverty. 

‘Where are you — staying now?’ Kate asked, and she wondered 
how soon the old bag would be able to come to the point. 

‘Southern Paciflc Hotel. I got a room.’ 

‘Oh, then you don’t work in a house now?’ 

‘I couldn’t never get started again,’ said Ethel. ‘You shouldn’t 
of run me off.’ She wiped big tears from the corners of her ej-cs 
with the tip of a cotton glove. ‘Things are bad,’ she said. ‘First 
I had trouble when we got that new judge. Ninety days, and I 
didn’t have no record - not here anyways. I come out of that and 
I got the old Joe. I didn’t know I had it. Give it to a regular - 
nice fella, worked on the seaion gang. He got sore an’ busted me 
up, hurt my nose, lost four teeth, an’ that new judge he gave me 
a hundred and eighty. Hell, Kate, you lose all your contacts in 
a hundred and eighty days. They forget you’re alive. I just never 
could get started.’ 

Kate nodded her head in cold and shallow sympathy. She 
knew that Ethel was working up to the bite. Just before it came 
Kate made a move. She opened her desk drawer and took out 
some money and held it out to Ethel. ‘I never let a friend dowu,’ 
she said. ‘Why don’t you go to a new town, start fresh? It might 
change your luck.’ 

Ethel tried to keep her fingers from grabbing at the money. 
She fanned the notes like a poker hand - four tens. Her mouth 
began to work with emotion. 

Ethel said, ‘I kind of hoped you’d see your way to let me take 
more than forty bucks.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Didn’t you get my letter?’ 

‘What letter?’ 

.‘Oh!’ said Ethel. ‘Well, maybe it got lost in the mail. TJiey 
don’t take no care of things. Anyways, I 

441 



after me. I don’t feel good hardly ever. Got a kind of weight 
dragging my guts down.’ She sighed and then she spoke so 
rapidly that Kate knew it had been rehearsed. 

‘Well, maybe you remember how I’ve got like second sight,’ 
Ethel began. ‘Always predicting things that come true. Always 
dreaming stuff and it come out. Fella says I should go iii the 
business. Says I’m a natural medium. You remember that?’ 

‘No,’ said Kate, ‘I don’t.’ 

‘Don’t? Well, maybe you never noticed. All the others did. I 
told ’em lots of things and they come true.’ 

‘What are you trjung to say ? ’ 

'I had this-here dream. I remember when it was because it was 
the same night Faye died.’ Her eyes flicked up at Kate’s cold 
face. She continued doggedly, ‘It rained that night, and it was 
raining in my dream - anyways, it w'as wet. Well, in my dream 
I seen you come out the kitchen door. It wasn’t pitch-dark - 
moon was coming through a little. And the ^eam thing 
was you. You went out to the back of the lot and stooped 
over. I couldn’t see what you done. Then you come creeping 
back. 

‘Next thing I knew -why, Faye was dead.’ She paused and 
waited for some comment from Kate, but Kate’s face was ex- 
pressionless. 

Ethel waited until she was sure Kate would not speak. ‘Well, 
like 1 said, I always believed in my dreams. It’s funny, there 
wasn’t nothing out there e.\cept some smashed medicine bottles 
and a little rubber tit from an eyc-dropper.’ 

Kate said lazily, ‘So you took them to a doctor. What did he 
say had been in the bottles?' 

‘Oh, I didn’t do nothing like that.’ 

‘You should have,’ said Kate. 

‘I don’t want to see anybody get in trouble. I’ve had enough 
trouble myself. I put that broken glass in an envelope and stuck 
it away.’ 

Kate said softly, ‘.^nd so you are coming to me for advice?’ 

‘Yes, ma’am,’ 

‘I’ll tell you what I think,’ said Kate. ‘I think you’re a worn- 
out old whore and you've been beaten over the head too many 
times.’ 

‘Don’t you start saying I’m nuts — ’ Ethel began, 

‘No, maybe you’re not, but you’re tired and you’re sick. I told 
you I never let a friend down. You can come back here. You 
can’t work but you can help around, clean and give the cook a 


4-12 



-hand. You’ll have a bed and you’ll get your meals. How would 
that be? And a little spending mon^.’ 

Ethel stirred tmeasily. ‘No, ma’am,’ she said. ‘I don’t think 
I want to - sleep here. I don’t carry that envelope around. I left . 
it with a friend.’ 

‘What did you have in mind?’ 

‘Well, I thought if you could see your way to let me have a 
hundred dollars a month, why, I could make out and maybe get 
my, health back.’ 

‘You said you lived at the Southern Pacific Hotel?’ 

‘Yes, ma’am - and my room is right up the hall from the desk. 
The night clerk’s a friend of mine. He don’t never sleep when 
he’s on duty. Nice fella.’ 

.Kate said, ‘Don’t wet your pants, Ethel. All you’ve got to 
worry about is how much does the “nice fella” cost. Now wait a 
minute,’ She counted six more ten-dollar bills from the drawer 
in front of her and held them out. 

‘Will it come the first of the month or do I have to come here 
for it?’ 

'I’ll send it to you,’ said Kate. ‘And, Ethel,’ she continued 
quietly, ‘I still thiiik you ought to have those bottles analysed.’ 

Ethel clutched the money tightly in her hand. She was bub- 
bling over with triumph and good feeling. It was one of the few 
things that had ever worked out for her. ‘I wouldn’t think of 
doing that,’ she said. ‘Not unless I had to.’ 

After she had gone Kate strolled out to the back of the lot 
behind the house. And even after years she could see from the 
unevenness of the earth that it must have been pretty thoroughly 
dug over. • 

The next morning the judge heard the usual chronicle of 
small violence and nocturnal greed. He only half listened to the 
fourth case and at the end of the terse testimony of the com- 
plaining wimess he asked, ‘How much did you lose?’ 

, The dark-haired man said, ‘Pretty close to a hundred dollars.’ 

The judge turned to the. arresting officer. ‘How much did she 
have?’ 

‘Ninety-six dollars. She got whisky and cigarettes and some 
magazines from the night clerk at six o’clock this morning. 

Ethel cried, ‘I never seen this guy in my life.’ 

The judge looked up from his papers. ‘Twice for prosritution 
and now robbery. You’re costing too much. I want you out o 
town by noon.’ He turned to the officer. ‘Tell ffie sheriff to^run 
her over the county line.’ And he said to Ethel, If ’ 

443 . 



back, ril give, you over to the county for the limit, and that’s 
San Quentin. -Do you understand?’ 

Ethel said, ‘Judge, I want to see you alone.’ 

‘Why?’ 

‘I got to see >>00,’ said Ethel. ‘This is a frame.’ 

‘Everything’s a frame,’ said the judge. ‘Next.’ 

While a deputy sheriff drove Ethel to the county line on the 
bridge over the Pajaro River, the complaining witness strolled 
down Castroville Street towards Kate’s, changed his mind and 
went back to Kenoe’s barber-shop to get a haircut. 

Ill 

Ethel’s visit did not disturb Kate very much when it happened. 
She knew about what attention would be paid to a whore with 
a grievance, and that an analysis of the broken bottles would not 
show anything recognizable as poison. She had nearly forgotten 
Faye. The forcible recalling was simply an unpleasant memorj'. 

Gradually, however, she found herself thinking about it One 
night when she was checking the items on a grocery bill 'a' 
thought shot into her mind, shining and winking like a meteor. 
The thought flashed and went out so quickly that she had .to 
stop what she was doing to try to find it How was tlie dark face 
of Charles involved in the thought? And Sam Hamilton's 
puzzled and merry eyes? And why did she get a shiver of fear 
from the flashing thought? 

She gave it up and went back to her work, but the face of 
Charles was behind her, looking over her shoulder. Her fingers 
began to hurt her. She put the accounts away and made a tour 
^through the house. It was a slow', listless night — a Tuesday 
night. There weren’t even enough customers to put on the 
circus. 

Kate toew how the girls felt about her. They were desperately 
afraid of her. She kept them that W'ay. It was probable that they 
hated her, and that didn’t matter either. But they trusted her, 
and that did matter. If they followed the rules she laid down, 
followed them exactly, Kate would take care of them and protect 
them. There was no love involved and no respect. She. never re- 
warded them and she punished an offender only twice before she 
removed her. The girls did have the security of knowing that 
they w'ould not be punished without cause. 

As Kate walked about, the girls became elaborately'- casual. 
Kate knew about that too and expected it. But on this side she 

444 




have ashed someone who knew -‘Suppose you gave croton oil to 
a person. What would happen?’ 

‘Well, suppose you gave little doses and kept it up a long 
time?’ She would know. Maybe somebody else would know. 

‘Suppose you heard about a rich madam who willed every- 
thing to a new girl and then died.’ Kate Imew perfectly well 
what her first thought would be. What insanity had made her 
get Ethel floated? Now she couldn’t be found. Ethel should 
have been paid and tricked into turning over the glass. Where 
was the glass now? In an envelope - but . where? How. could 
Ethel be found? 

Ethel would know why and how she had been floated. Ethel 
wasn’t bright, but she might tell somebody who tras bright. 
That chattering voice might tell the story, how Faye was sick, 
and what she looked like, and about the will. 

Kate was breathing quickly and little prickles of fear were be- 
ginning to course over her body. She should go to New York or 
somewhere -not bother to sell the house. She didn’t need tlie 
money. She had plenty. Nobody could find her. Yes, but if she 
ran out and the clever person heard Ethel tell the story, wouldn’t 
that cinch it? 

Kate got up from her bed and took a heavy dose of bromide. 

From that time on the crouching fear had always been at her 
side. She was almost glad when she learned that the pain in her 
hands was developing arthritis. An evil voice had whispered that 
it might be a punishment. 

She had never gone out in the town very much, but now she 
developed a reluctance to go out at all. She knew that men stared 
secretly after her, knowing who she was. Suppose one of those 
men should have Charles’s face or Samuel’s eyes. She had to 
drive herself to go out once a week. 

Then she built the lean-to and had it painted grey. She said it 
was because the light troubled her eyes and gradually she began 
to believe the light did trouble her eyes. Her eyes burned after a 
trip to the town. She spent more and more time in her little room. 

It is possible to some people, and it was possible for Kate, to 
¦ hold two opposing thoughts at the same time. She believed that 
the light pained her eyes, and also that the grey room \vas a cave 
to hide in, a dark burrow' in the earth, a place where no eyes 
could stare at her. Once, sitting in her pillowed chair, she con- 
sidered having a secret door built so that she would have an 
avenue of escape. And then a feeling rather than a thought threw 
out the plan. She would not be protected then. If she could get 

446 


out, something could get in - that something which had begun 
to crouch outside the house, to crawl close to the walls at night, 
and to rise silently, trying to look through the windows. It re- 
quired more and more will-power for Kate to leave the house on 
Monday afternoons. 

When Cal began to follow her she had a terrible leap of fear. 
And when she waited for him behind the privet she was very 
near to panic. 

But now her head dug deep in her soft pillows and her eyes 
felt the gentle weight of the bromide. 


CHAPTER41 

I 

The nation sh'pped imperceptibly towards war, frightened 
and at the same time attracted. People had not felt the shaking 
emotion of war in nearly sixty years. The Spanish affair was 
more nearly an expedition than a war. Air Wilson was re-elected 
President in November on his platform promise to keep us out 
of war, and at the same time he was instructed to take a firm 
hand, which inevitably meant war. Business picked up and 
prices began to rise. British purchasing agents roved about the 
country, buying food and cloth and metals and chemicals. A 
charge of excitement ran through the country. People didn’t 
really believe in war even while they planned it. The Salinas 
Valley lived about as it always had. ^ 

m 

II 

Cal walked to school with Aron. 

‘You look tired,’ Aron said. 

‘Do I?’ 

‘I heard you come in last night. Four o’clock. What do you 
do so late?’ 

‘I was walking around — thinking. How would you like to quit 
school and go back to the ranch?’ 

‘What for?’, 

‘We could make some money for Father.’ 

‘I’m going to college. I wdsh I could go now. Ever5’body is 
laughing at us. I want to get out of towm.’ 

‘You act mad.’ 


447 



Tm not mad. But i; didn’t lose the money./ 1 didn’t have a 
crazy lettuce idea. But people laugh at me just the same. And I 
don’t know if there's enough money for college.’ 

¦ ‘He didn’t mean to lose the money.’ 

‘But he lost it.’ 

Cal said, ‘You’ve got this year to finish and next before you 
can go to college.’ 

‘Do you think I don’t Icnow it?’ - , . 

‘If you worked hard, maybe you could take entrance examina- 
tions next summer and go in the fall.’ 

. Aron swung round. ‘I couldn’t do it.’ 

‘I think you could. Why don’t you talk to the principal? And 
I bet the Reverend Rolf would help you.’ 

. Aron said, ‘I want to get out of this town. I don’t- ever want 
to come back. They still call us Lettuce-heads. The}*- laugh at us.’ 

‘How about Abra?’ 

‘Abra will do what’s best.’ 

Cal asked, ‘Would she want you to go away?’ 

‘Abra’s going to do what I want her to do.’ 

Cal thought for a moment. ‘I’ll tell you what. I’m going to try 
to make some money. If you knuckle down and pass examina- 
tions a year early, why, I’ll help you through college.’ 

‘YouwiU?’ 

‘Sure I will.’ 

‘Why, rU go and see the principal right away.’ He quickened 
his steps. 

Cal called, ‘Aron, vrait! Listen! If he says he thinks you can 
do it, don't tell Father.’ ' . 

‘Why not?’ 

‘I was just thinking how nice it would be if you went to him 
and told him you’d done it.’ 

‘I don’t see what difference it makes.’ , 

‘You don’t?’ 

‘No, I don’t,’ said Aron. ‘It sounds silly to me.’ 

Cal had a violent urge to shout, ‘I know who our mother is! I 
can show her to you.’ That would cut through and get inside of 
Aron. 

Cal met Abra in the hall before the school-bell rang. ¦ 

‘Whafs the matter with Aron?’ he demanded. 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Yes, 3’ou do,’ he said. 

‘He’s just in a cloud. I think it’s that minister.’ 

‘Does he walk home with j^ou?' 

448 



‘Sure he does. But I can see right tlirough him. He’s wearing 
wings.’ 

‘He’s still ashamed about the lettuce.' 

‘I know he is/ said Abra. ‘I try to talk him out of it. Maybe 
he’s enjoying it.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Nothing/ said Abra. 

After supper that night Cal said, ‘Father, would you mind if 
I went down to the ranch Friday afternoon.^’ 

Adam turned in his chair. ‘What for?’ 

‘Just want to see. Just want to look around.’ 

‘Does Aron want to go?’ 

‘No. I want to go alone.’ 

‘I don’t see why you shouldn’t. Lee, do you see any reason • 
why he shouldn’t go?’ 

‘No/ said Lee. He studied Cal. ‘Thinking seriously of going 
to farming?’ 

‘I might. If you’d let me take it over, I’d farm it. Father.’ 

‘The lease has more than a year to run,’ Adam said. 

‘After that can I farm it?’ 

‘How about school?’ 

‘I’ll be through school.’ 

‘Well, we’ll see/ said Adam. ‘You might want to go to college.’ 

When Cal started for the front door Lee followed and walked 
out with him. 

‘Can you tell me what it’s about?’ Lee asked. 

‘I just want to look around.’ 

‘All right, I guess I’m left out.’ Lee turned to go back into the 
house. Then he called, ‘Cal!’ The boy stopped. ‘You worried. 
Cal?’ 

‘No; 

‘I’ve got five thousand dollars if you ever need it?’ 

‘Why should I need it?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Lee. 


in 

Will Hamilton liked his glass cage of an oSice in the garage. His 
business interests were much under than the automobile agency, 
but he did not get another ofiBce. He loved the movement that 
went on outside his square glass cage. And he had put in double 
glass to kill the noise of the garage. 

He sat in his big red leather s^vivel chair, and most of the^ 

y \ 



time he enjoyed his life. When people spoke of his brother Joe 
making so much money in advertising in the East, Will always 
said he himself was a big frog in a little puddle. 

‘I’d be afraid to go to a big city/ he said. Tm just a country 
boy.’ And he liked the laugh that always followed. -It proved to 
him that his friends knew he was well off. 

Cal came in to see him one Saturday morning. Seeing Will’s 
puzzled look, he said, ‘I’m Cal Trask.’ 

‘Oh, sure. Lord, you’re getting to be a big boy. Is your father 
down?’ 

. ‘No. I came alone.’ 

‘Well, sit down. I don’t suppose you smoke.' 

‘Sometimes. Cigarettes.’ 

Will slid a package of Murads across the desk. Cal opened the 
box and then closed it. ‘I don’t think I will right now.' 

Will looked at the dark-faced boy and he liked him. He 
thought, 'This boy is sharp. He’s nobody’s fool.' ‘I guess you’ll 
be going into business pretty soon,’ he said. 

‘Yes, sir. I thought I might run the ranch when I get out of 
high school.’ 

‘There’s no money in that,’ said Will. ‘Farmers don’t make 
any money. It’s the man who buys from him and sells. You’ll 
never make any money farming.’ Will knew that Cal was feeling 
him, testing him, observing him, and he approved of that. 

And Cal had made up his mind, but first he asked, ‘Mr 
Hamilton, you haven’t any children, have you?’ 

‘Well, no. And I’m sorry about that. I guess I’m sorriest about 
that.’ And then, ‘What makes you ask?’ 

Cal ignored the question. ‘Would you give me some advice?’ 

Will felt a glow of pleasure. ‘If I can. I’ll be glad to. What is 
it you want to know ? ’ 

And then Cal did something Will Hamilton approved even 
more. He used candour as a weapon. He said, ‘I want to make a 
lot of money. I want you to tell me how.’ 

Will overcame his impulse to laugh. Naive as the statement 
was, he didn’t think Cal was naive. ‘Everybody wants that,’ he 
said. ‘What do you mean by a lot of money?' 

‘Twenty or thirty thousand dollars.’ 

‘Good God!' said Will, and he screeched his chair forward. 
And now he did laugh, but not in derision. Cal smiled along 
with Will’s laughter. 

Will said, ‘Can you tell me why you want to make so much?’ 

‘Yes, sir,’ said Cal, ‘I can.’ And Cal opened the box of Murads 

450 



and took out one of the oval cork-tipped cigarettes and lighted 
it. ‘I’ll tell you why/ he said. 

Will leaned his chair back in enjoyment. 

‘My father lost a lot of mone5'/ 

‘I know/ said Will. ‘I warned him not to try to ship lettuce 
across the country.’ 

‘You did? Why did you?’ 

_ ‘There were no guarantees/ said Will. ‘A business man has to 
protect himself. If anything happened, he, was finished. And it 
happened. Go on.’ 

‘I want to make enough money to give him back what he 
lost.’ 

Will gaped at him. ‘Why?’ he asked. 

‘I want to.’ 

Will said, ‘Are you fond of him?’ 

‘Yes/ 

Will’s fleshy face contorted and a memory swept over him like 
a chilling wind. He did not move slowly over the past, it was all 
there in one flash, all of the years, a picture, a feeling and a 
despair, all stopped the way a fast camera stops the world. There 
was the flashing Samuel, beautiful as dawn with a fancy like a 
swallow’s flight, and the brilh'ant, brooding Tom who was dark 
fire, Una who rode the storms, and lovely Mollie, Dessie of 
laughter, George handsome and with a sweetness that filled a 
room like the perfume of flowers, and there was Joe, the young- 
est, the beloved. Each one without effort brought some gift to 
the family. 

Nearly everyone has his box of secret pain, shared with no 
one.- Will had concealed his well, laughed loud, exploited per- 
verse virtues, and never let his jealousy go wandering. He 
thought of himself as slow, doltish, conservative, uninspired. No 
great dream lifted him high and no despair forced self-destruc- 
tion. He was always on the edge, trying to hold on to the rim of 
the family with what gifts he had -care, and reason, application. 
He kept the books, hired the attorneys, called the undertaker, 
and eventually paid the bills. The other didn’t even know they 
needed him. He had the ability to get money and to keep it. He 
thought the Hamiltons despised him for his one abilitj*. He had 
loved them doggedly, had always been at hand with his money 
to pull them out of their errors. He thought they were ashamed 
of him, and he fought bitterly for their recognition. All of this 
was in the frozen wind that blew through him. 

His slightly bulging eyes were damp as he stared past Cal, and 

451 



the boy asked, ‘What’s the matter, Mr Hamilton? Don’t you' feel 
well?’ 

Will had sensed his family but he had not understood them. 
And they had accepted him without knowing there was anything 
to understand. And now this boy came along. Will understood 
him, felt him, sensed him, recognized him. This was the son he 
should have, had, or the brother, or the father. Arid the cold 
wind of memory changed to a warmth towards Cal which 
gripped him in the stomach and pushed up against his lungs. 

He forced his attention to the glass office. Cal was sitting back 
in his chair, waiting. 

Will did not know how long his silence had lasted. ‘I was 
thinking,’ he said lamely. He made his voice stern. ‘You asked 
me something. I’m a business man. I don’t give things away. ,1 
sell them.’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ Cal was watchful, but he felt that Will Hamilton 
liked him. 

Will said, ‘I want to know something and I want the truth. 
Will j'ou tell me the truth?’ 

‘I don’t Imow,’ said Cal. 

‘I like that. How do you know until you know the question? I 
like that. That’s smart -and honest. Listen -you have a brother. 
Does your father like him better than you?’ 

‘Everybody does,’ said Cal calmly. ‘Everybody loves Aron.’ 

‘Do you?' 

‘Yes, sir. At least - yes, I do.’ 

‘What’s the “at least"?’ 

‘Sometimes I think he’s stupid, but I like him.’ 

‘Now, how about your father?’ 

‘I love him,’ said Chi. 

‘And he loves your brother better.’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Now, you say you want to give back the money your father 
lost. Why?’ 

Ordinarily Cal’s eyes were squinted and cautious, but now 
they were so wide that they seemed to look around and through 
Will. Cal was as close to his own soul as it is possible to get. 

‘My father is good,’ he said. ‘I want to make it up to him 
because I am not good.’ 

‘If you do that, wouldn’t j'ou be good?’ 

‘No,’ said Cal. ‘I think bad.’ 

Will had never met anyone who spoke so nakedly. He was 
near to embarrassment because of the nakedness, and he knew 

452 


how rafe Cal was in his stripped honesty. 'Only one more/ he 
saidj ‘and I won’t mind if you don’t answer it. I don’t think I 
would answer it. Here it is. Suppose you should get this money 
and give it to your father -would it cross your mind that you 
were trying to buy his love?’ 

'Yes, sir. It would. And it would be true.’ 

‘That’s all I want to ask. That’s all.’ Will leaned forward and 
put his hands against his sweating, pulsing forehead. He could 
not remember when he had been so shaken. And in Cal there 
was a cautious leap of triumph. He knerv he had won and he 
closed his face against showing it. 

Will raised his head and took off his glasses and wiped the 
moisture from them. ‘Let’s go outside/ he said. ‘Let’s go for a 
drive.’ 

Will drove a big Winton now, with a hood as long as a coffin 
and a powerful panting mutter in its bowels. He drove south 
from King City over the county road, through the gathering 
forces of spring, and the meadowlarks flew ahead, bubbling 
melody from the fence wires. Pico Blanco stood up against the 
West with a full head of snow, and in the valley the lines of 
eucalyptus, which stretched across the valley to brealc the winds, 
were gleaming sih'er with new leaves. 

When he came to the side road that led into the home draw of 
the Trask place Will pulled up on the side of the road. He had 
not spoken since the Winton rolled out of King City. The big 
motor idled with a deep whisper. 

Will, looking straight ahead, said, ‘Cal -do you want to be 
partners with me?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘I don’t like to take a partner without money. I could lend 
you the money, but there’s only trouble in that.’ 

‘I can get money/ said Cal. 

‘How much?’ 

‘Five thousand dollars.’ 

‘You - 1 don’t believe it.’ 

Cal didn’t answer. 

‘I believe it/ said Will. ‘Borrowed?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘What interest?’ 

‘None.’ 

‘That’s a good trick. Where will you get it?’ 

‘I won’t tell you, sir.’ ' , . 

Will shook his head and laughed. He was filled 

453 



‘Maybe I’m being a fool, but I believe you — and I’m not a fool.’ 
He gxmned his motor and then let it idle again. ‘I want you to 
listen. Do you read the papers?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘We’re going to be in this war any minute now.’ 

‘That^s what it looks like.’ 

‘Well, a lot of people think so. Now, do you know the present 
price of beans? I mean, what you can sell a hundred sacks for in 
Salinas?’ 

•, ‘I’m not sure. I think about three to three and a half cents a 
pound.’ 

‘What do you mean you’re not sure? How do you know that?’ 

‘Well, I was thinldng about asking my father to let me run 
the ranch.’ 

‘I see. But you don’t want to farm. You’re too smart. Your 
father’s tenant is named Rantani. He’s a Swiss Italian, a good 
farmer. He’s put nearly five hundred acres under cultivation. If 
we can guarantee him five cents a pound and give him a seed 
loan, he’ll plant beans. So will every other farmer around here- 
We could contract five thousand acres of beans.’ 

Cal said, ‘What are we going to do with five-cent beans in a 
three-cent market? Oh, yes! But how cao’We be sure?’ 

Will said, ‘Are we partners?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘Yes,WiU!’ 

‘Yes, Will.’ 

‘How soon can you get five thousand dollars?’ 

‘By next Wednesday.’ 

‘Shake!’ Solemnly the stout man and the lean dark boy shook 
hands. 

Will, still holding Cal’s hand, said, ‘Now we’re partners. I 
have a contract with the British Purchasing Agency. And I have 
a friend in the Quartermaster Corps. I bet we can sell all the 
dried beans we can find at ten cents a pound or more.’ 

‘When can you sell?’ 

‘I’ll sell before we sign anything. Now, would you like to go 
¦ up to the old place and talk to Rantani?’ 

‘Yes, sir,’ said Cal. 

Will double-clutched the Winton and the big green car lum- 
bered into the side road. 


A<Jl 



CHAPTER 42 


A w A R comes always to someone else. In Salinas we were aware 
that the United States was the greatest and most powerful na- 
tion in the world. Every American was a rifleman by birth, and 
one American was worth ten or twenty foreigners in a fight. 

Pershing’s expedition into Mexico after Villa had exploded 
one of our myths for a little while. We had truly believed that 
Mexicans can’t shoot straight and besides were lazy and smpid. 
When our own Troop C came wearily back from the border they 
said that none of this was true. Mexicans could shoot straight, 
goddam it ! And Villa’s horsemen had out-ridden and out-lasted 
our own boys. The two evenings a month of training had not 
toughened them very much. And last, the Mexicans seemed to 
have out-thought and out-ambushed Black Jack Pershing. When 
the Mexicans were joined By their ally, dysentery, it was god- 
awful. Some of our boys didn’t really feel good again for years. 

Somehow we didn’t connect Germans with Alexicans. We 
went right back to our myths. One American was as good as 
twenty Germans. This being true, we had only to act in a stern 
manner to bring the Kaiser to heel. He wouldn’t dare interfere 
with our trade - but he did. He wouldn’t stick out his neck and 
sink our ships -but he did. It was stupid, but he did, and so 
there was nothing for it but to fight him. 

The war, at first anyway, was for other people. We, I, my 
family and friends, had kind of ring scats, and it was pretty ex- 
citing. And just as war is always for somebody else, so it is also 
true that someone else always gets killed. And Mother of God ! ¦ 
that wasn’t true either. The dreadful telegrams began to sneak 
sorrowfully in, and it was everybody’s brother. Here we were, 
over six thousand miles from the anger and the noise, and that 
didn’t save' us. 

It wasn’t much fun then. The Liberty Belles could parade in 
white caps and uniforms of white sharkskin. Our uncle could 
re-write his Fourth of July speech and use it to sell bonds. We 
in high school could wear olive drab and campaign hats and 
learn the manual of arms from the physics teacher, but, Jesus 
Christ! Marty Hopps dead, the Berges boy, from across the 
street, tlie handsome one our little sister was in love with from 
the time she was three, blown to bits !^ ^ _ 

And the gangling, shuffling, loose-jointed boys c" ring suit- 

455 



cases were marching awkwardly down Main Street to the 
Southern Pacific Depot. They were sheepish, and the Salinas' 
'Band marched ahead of them, playing ‘Stars and Stripes For- 
ever’, and the families walking along beside them, were crying, 
and the music sounded like a dirge. The draftees' wouldn’t look 
at their mothers. They didn’t dare. We’d never thought the war . 
could happen to us. 

.There were some in Salinas who began to talk softly in the 
poolrooms and the bars. These had private information from a 
soldier - we weren’t getting the truth. Our men were being sent 
in without guns. Troopships were sunk and tlie government 
wouldn’t tell us. The German army was so far superior to ours 
that we didn’t have a chance. That Kaiser was a smart fellow. 
He was getting ready to invade America. But would Wilson tell 
us this? He would not And usually these carrion talkers were, 
the same ones who had said one American was worth twenty 
Germans in a scrap -the same ones. 

Little groups of British in their outlandish uniforms (but they 
did look smart) moved about the coimtry, buying everything 
that wasn’t nailed down and paying for it and paying big. A 
good many of the British purchasing men were crippled, but 
they wore their imiforms just the same. Among other things they 
bought beans, because beans are easy to transport and they don’t 
spoil and a man can damn well live on them. Beans are twelve 
and a half cents a pound and hard to find. And farmers wished 
they hadn’t contracted their beans for a lousy two cents a pound , 
above the going price six months ago. 

'•The nation and the Salinas Valley changed its songs. At first 
we sang of how we could knock hell out of Heligoland and hang 
the Kaiser and march over there and clean up the mess them 
damn foreigners had made. And then suddenly we sang, ‘In the 
war’s red curse stand the Red Cross nurse. She’s the rose of No 
Man’s Land’, and we sang, ‘Hello, central, give me Heaven, 
’cause my Daddy’s there’, and we sang, ‘Just a baby’s prayer at 
nyilight, when lights are low. She climbs upstairs and says her 
prayers — Oh, God ! please tell my daddy thaddy must take 
care — ’ I guess we were like a tough but inex-perienced little boy 
who gets punched in the nose in the first flurry and it hurts and 
we wished it was over. 


d'iA 



CHAPTER 43 


I 

Late in the summer Lee came in off the street, carrying his 
big market basket. Lee had become American conservati%’e in his 
clothes since he had lived in Salinas. He regularly wore black 
broadcloth when he went out of the house. His shirts were 
white, his collars high and stiff, and he affected narrow black 
string ties, like those which once were the badge for Southern 
senators. His hats were black, round of crowTO and straight of 
brim, and uncrushed as though he still left room for a coiled 
queue. He was immaculate. 

Once Adam had remarked on the quiet splendour of Lee’s 
clothes, and Lee had grinned at him. ‘I have to do it,’ he said. 
‘One must be very rich to dress as badly as you do. The poor are 
forced to dress well.’ 

‘Poor!’ Adam exploded. ‘You’ll be lending us monej’^ before 
we’re through.’ 

‘That might be,’ said Lee. 

This afternoon he set his heavj' basket on the floor. ‘I’m 
going to try to make a winter melon soup,’ he said. ‘Chinese 
cooking. I have a cousin in Chinatown, and he told me how. 
My cousin is in the fire-cracker and fan-tan business.’ 

‘I thought you didn’t have any relatives,’ said Adam. 

‘All Chinese are related, and the ones named Lee are closest,’ 
said Lee. ‘My cousin is a Suey Dong. Recently he went into hid- 
ing for his health and he learned to cook. You stand the melon 
in a pot, cut off the top carefully, put in a whole chicken, mush- 
rooms, water chestnuts, leeks, and just a touch of ginger. Then 
you put the top back on the melon and cook it as slowly as pos- 
sible for two days. Ought to be good.’ 

Adam was lying back in his chair, his palms clasped behind 
his head, and he was smiling at the ceiling. ‘Good, Lee, good,’ 
he said. 

‘You didn’t even listen,’ said Lee. 

¦ Adam drew himself upright. He said, ‘You tliink j'ou know 
your own children and then you find you don’t at all.’ 

Lee, smiled. ‘Has some detail of their lives escaped you?’ he 
asked. _ ^ ^ ^ 

Adam chuckled. ‘I only found out by accidem ’ ' 

457 



knew that Aron wasn’t around very much this summer, but I 
tliought he was just out playing.’ 

‘Playing!’ said Lee. ‘He hasn’t played for years.’ 

‘Well,_whatever he does.’ Adam continued, ‘Today I met Mr 
Kilkenny -you' know, from the high school? He thought I knew 
all about it. Do you know what that boy is doing?* 

‘No,’ said Lee. 

‘He’s covered all next year’s work. He’s going to take examina- 
tions for college and save a year. And Kilkenny is confident that 
he will pass. Now, what do you think of that? ’ , , 

‘Remarkable,’ said Lee. ‘Why is he doing it?’ 

‘Why, to save a year ! ’ 

‘What does he want to save it for?’ 

‘Goddam it, Lee, he’s ambitious. Can’t you understand that?’ 

, ‘No,’ said Lee. ‘I never could.’ 

Adam said, ‘He ne\'er spoke of it. I wonder if his brother 
knows.’ 

‘I guess Aron wants it to be a surprise. We shouldn’t mention 
it until he does.’ 

‘I guess you’re right. Do you know, I.ee? - I’m proud of him. 
Terribly proud. This makes me feel good. I wish Cal had some 
ambition.’ 

‘Maybe he has,’ said Lee. ‘Maybe he has some kind of. a 
secret too.’ 

‘Maybe. God knows we haven’t seen much of him lately 
either. Do you think it’s good for him to be away so much?’ 

‘Cal’s trying to find himself,’ said Lee. ‘I guess titis personal 
hide-and-seek is not imusual. And some people are “it” all their 
lives - hopelessly “it”.’ 

‘Just think,’ said Adam. ‘A whole year’s work ahead. When he 
tells us we ought to have a present for him.’ 

‘A gold watch,’ said Lee. 

‘That’s right,’ said Adam. ‘I’m going to get one and have it 
engraved and ready. What should it say?’ 

‘The jeweller will tell you,’ said Lee. ‘You take the chicken out 
after Uyo days and cut it off the bone and put the meat back.’ 

‘What chicken?’ 

‘Winter melon soup,’ said Lee. 

‘Have we got enough money to send him to college, Lee?’ 

‘If we’re careful and he doesn’t develop expensive tastes.’ 

‘He wouldn’t,’ Adam said. 

‘I didn’t think I would -but 1 have.’ Lee inspected the sleeve 
of his coat with admiration. , 


458 



II 


The rectory of St Paul’s Episcopal Church was large and ramb- 
ling. It had been built for ministers with large families. Mr Rolf, 
unmarried and simple in his tastes, closed up most of the house, 
but when Aron needed a place to study he gave him a large 
room and helped him with his studies. 

Mr Rolf was fond of Aron. He liked the angelic beauty of his 
face and his smooth cheeks, his narrow hips, and long straight 
legs. He liked to sit in the room and watch Aron’s face straining 
with effort to learn. He understood why Aron could not work 
at home in an atmosphere not conducive to hard clean thought. 
Mr Rolf felt that Aron was his product, his spiritual son, his 
contribution to the Church. He saw him through his travail of 
celibacy and felt that he was guiding him into calm waters. 

Their discussions were long and close and personal. ‘I Imow I 
am criticized,’ Mr Rolf said.- ‘I happen to believe in a Higher 
Church than some people. No one can tell me that confession is 
not just as important a sacrament as communion. And you mind 
my word — I am going to bring it back, but cautiously, gradu- 
ally.’ 

‘When I have a church I’ll do it too.’ 

‘It requires great tact,’ said Mr Rolf. 

Aron said, ‘I wish we had in our Church, well - well, I might 
as well say it. I wish we had something like the Augustines or 
the Franciscans. Someplace to withdraw. Sometimes I feel dirty. 
I want to get away from the dirt and be clean.’ 

‘I know how you feel,’ Mr Rolf said earnestly. ‘But there I 
cannot go along with you. I can’t think that our Lord Jesus 
would want His priesthood withdrawn from service to the world. 
Think how He insisted that we preach the Gospel, help the sick 
and poor, even lower ourselves into filth to raise sinners from 
the slime. We must keep the exactness of His example before 
us.’ 

His eyes began to glow and his voice took on the throadness 
he used in sermons. ‘Perhaps I shouldn’t tell you this. And I 
hope you won’t find any pride in me telling it. But there is a 
land of glory in it. For the last five weeks a woman has been 
coming to evening service. I don’t think you can see her from 
the choir. She sits always in the last row on the left-hand side - 
yes, you can' see her too. She is off af'an angle. Yes, you can see 
her. She wears a veil and she ahv’ays leaves before I can get back 
after recessional.’ — 


,459 



Aron was lonely at Stanford. His letters were drenched v/itli 
lonesome longing for his girl. Together they were matter-of-fact, 
but from the university, ninety miles away, he made passionate 
love to her, shut himself off from the life around him. He 
studied, ate, slept, and wrote to Abra, and this was his whole 
life. 

In the afternoons she sat in the kitchen with Lee and helped 
him to string beans or slip peas from their pods. Sometimes she 
made fudge and very often she stayed to dinner rather than go 
home to her parents. There was no subject sire could not discuss 
with Lee. And the few things she could talk about to her father 
and mother were thin and pale and tired and mostly not even 
true. There Lee was different also. Abra wanted to tell Lee only 
true things even when she wasn’t quite sure what was trua, 

Lee would sit smiling a little, and his quick fragile hands 
flew about their work as though they had independent lives. 
Abra wasn’t aware that she spoke exclusively of herself. And 
sometimes while she talked Lee’s mind wandered out and came 
back and went out again like a ranging dog, and Lee would nod 
at intervals and make a quiet humming sound. 

He liked Abra and he felt strength and goodness in her, and 
warmth too. Her features had the bold muscular strength which 
could result finally eititer in ugliness or in great beauty. Lee, 
musing through her talk, thought of the round smooth faces of 
the Cantonese, his own breed. Even thin they were moon-faced. 
Lee should have liked that kind best since beauty must be some- 
what like ourselves, but he didn’t. When he thought of Chinese 
beauty the- iron predatory faces of the Manchus came to his 
mind, arrogant and unyielding faces of a people who had 
authority by unquestioned inheritance. 

She said, 'Maybe it was there all along. I don’t know. He 
never talked much about his father. It was after Mr Trask had 
the — you know -the lettuce. Aron was angry then.’ 

‘Why?’ Lee asked. ’ 

‘People were laughing at him.’ 

Lee’s whole mind popped back. ‘Laughing at Aron? Why at 
him? He didn’t have anything to do with it.’ \ 

‘Well, that’s the way he felt. Do you want to know what I 
think?’ 

‘Of course,’ said Lee. 

‘I figured this out and I’m not quite finished figuring. I 
thought he always felt - well, kind of crippled - maybe un- 
finished, because he didn't have a mother.’ ' * 

464 



Lee’s eyes opened wide and then drcroped again. He nodded. 

‘I see. Do you figure Cal that vray too?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Then why Aron?’ 

‘Well, I. haven’t got that yet. Maybe some people need things 
more than others, or hate things more. My father hates turnips. 
He always did. Never came from anything. Turnips make lum 
mad, real mad. Well, one time my mother was -well, huffy, and 
she made a casserole out of mashed turnips with lots of pepper . 
and cheese on top and got it all brown on top. My father ate lulf 
a dish of it before he asked what it was. My mother said turnips, 
and he threw the dish on the floor and got up and went out. 

I don’t think he ever forgave her.’ 

Lee chuckled. ‘He can forgive her because she said turnips. 
But, Abra, suppose he’d asked and she had said something else 
and he liked it and had another dish. And then aftenrards he 
found out. Why, he might have murdered her.’ 

‘I guess so. Well, anyway, I figure Aron needed a mother more 
than Cal did. And I think he always blamed his father.’ 

‘Why?’ 

‘I don’t know. That’s what I think.’ 

‘You get around, don’t you?’ 

‘Shouldn’t I?’ 

‘Of course you should.’ 

‘Shall I make some fudge?’ 

‘Not today. We still have some.’ 

‘What can I do?’ 

‘You can pound flour into the top round. Will you eat with 
us?’ 

‘No. I’m going to a birthday party, thank you. Do you think 
he’ll be a minister?’ 

‘How do I know?’ said Lee. ‘Maybe it’s just an idea.’ 

‘I hope he doesn’t,’ said Abra, and she clapped her mouth 
shut in astonishment at having said it. 

Lee got up and pulled out the pastry board and laid out the 
red meat and a flour sifter beside it. ‘Use the back of the knife,’ 
he said. ‘ , 

‘I know.’ She hoped he hadn’t heard her. 

But Lee asked, ‘Why don’t you want him to be c 
minister?’ 

‘I shouldn’fsay it’ . ' 

‘Yoii should say anything you want to. You don’t b 
explain.’ He went back to his chair, and Abra sifted Sc 

465 


with it. If I had anything at all to say - I would say it to 
you.’ 

The girl smiled at him. T’m clever,’ she said. ‘Shall I be 
clever?’ 

‘God help me- no,’ Lee protested. 

‘Then you don’t want me to try to figure it out?’ . 

‘I don’t care what you do as long as I don’t have anything to 
do with it. I guess no matter how weak and negative a good 
man is, he has as many sins on him as he can bear. I have enough 
sins to trouble me. Maybe they aren’t very fine sins compared to 
some, but, the way I feel, they’re all I can take care of. Please 
forgive me.’ 

Abra reached across the table and touched the back of his 
hand with floury fingers. The yellow skin on his hand was tight 
and glazed. He looked down at the white powdery smudges her 
fingers left. 

Abra said, ‘My father wanted a boy. I guess he hates turnips 
and girls. He tells everyone how he gave me my crazy name. 
"And though I called another, Abra came.” ’ 

Lee smiled at her. ‘You’re such a nice girl,’ he said. ‘I’U buy 
some turnips tomorrow if you’ll come to dinner.’ 

Abra asked softly, ‘Is she alive?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Lee. ¦ 

The front door slammed, and Cal came into the kitchen. 
‘Hello, Abra. Lee, is father home?’ 

‘No, not yet. What are you grinning all over for?’ 

Cal handed him a cheque. ‘There. That’s for you.’ 

Lee looked at it, *I didn’t want interest,’ he said. 

‘It’s better. I might want to borrow it back.’ 

‘You won’t tell me where you got it?’ 

‘No. Not yet. I’ve got a good idea — ’ His eyes flicked to 
Abra. 

‘I have to go home now,’ she said. 

Cal said, ‘She might as well be in on it. I decided to do it 
Thanskgiving, and Abra’U probably be around and Aron will be 
home.’ 

‘Do wltat?’ she asked. 

‘I’ve got a present for my father.’ 

‘What is it?’ Abra asked. 

, ‘I won’t tell. You’ll find out then.’ 

‘Does Lee know?’ 

‘Yes, but he won’t tell.’'' 

‘I don’t think I ever saw you so -gay,’ Abra said. ‘I don’t 

46S 



think I ever saw you gay at all/ She discovered in herself a 
warmth for him. 

After Abra had gone Cal sat dowm. ‘I don’t know whether to 
give it to him before Thanksgiving dinner or after,’ he said. 

‘After,’ said Lee. ‘Have you really got the money?’ 

‘Fifteen thousand dollars.’ 

‘Honestly?’ 

‘You mean, did I steal it?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Honestly,’ said Cal. ‘Remember how we had champagne for 
Aron? We’ll get champagne. And -well, we’ll maybe decorate 
the dining-room. Maybe Abra’ll help.’ 

‘Do you really think yom father wants money?’ 

-‘Why shouldn’t he?’ 

‘I hope you’re right,’ said Lee. ‘How have you been doing in 
school?’ 

‘Not very well. I’ll pick up after Thanksgiving,’ said Cal. 

II 

After school the next day Abra hurried and caught up with 
Cal. 

‘Hello, Abra,’ he said. ‘You make good fudge.’ 

‘That last was dry. It should be creamy.’ 

‘Lee is Just crazy about you. What have you done to him?’ 

‘I like Lee,’ she said, and then, ‘I want to ask you something, 
Cal.’ 

‘Yes?’ 

‘What’s the matter with Aron?’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘He just seems to think only about himself.’ 

‘I don’t think that’s very new. Have you had a fight with 
him?’ - 

‘No. When he had all that about going to Church and not 
getting married, I tried to fight with him, but he wouldn’t/ 

‘Not get married to you ? I can’t imagine that.’ ^ 

‘Cal, he writes me love letters now - only they aren’t to me. 

‘Then who are they to?’ 

‘It’s like they were to - himself.’ 

Cal said, ‘I know about the willow tree.’ 

She didn’t seem surprised. ‘Do you?’ she asked. 

‘Are you mad at Aron ?’ : " 

‘No, not mad. I just can’t find him. I don’t kno»r 

469 



She was thoughtful. He knew she was not finished and t^t 
she was wondering whether, she should go on. She decided. 

‘Joe, did -did she do anytliihg-well, peculiar -that day in 
court?’ 

‘Hell, no. Said she was framed like they always do.’ 

And then something came back to him that he hadn’t noticed 
at the time. Out of his memory Ethel’s voice came, saying, 
‘Judge, I got to see you alone. I got to tell you something.’ He 
tried to bury his memory deep so that his face would not speak. 
Kate said, ‘Well, what is it?’ 

He had been too late. His mind leaped for safet5^ ‘There’s 
something,’ he'said, to gain time. ‘I’m trying to think.’ 

‘Well, think ! ’ Her voice was edged and anxious. .. 

‘Well — ’ He had it. ‘Well, I heard her tell the cops -let’s see 
- she said why couldn’t they let her go south. She said she had 
relatives in San Luis Obispo.’ ; 

Kate leaned quickly towards him. ‘Yes?* 

‘And the cops said it was too damn far.’ , 

‘You’re smart, Joe. Where will you go first?’ 

‘Watsonville,’ he said. ‘I got a friend in San Luis. He’ll look 
around for me. I’ll give him a ring.’ • , ' 

‘Joe,’ she said sharply, ‘I wtint this quiet.’ ' 

‘For five hundred you’ll get it quiet and quick,’ said Joe. He 
felt fine even though her eyes were slitted and inspective again. 
Her next words jarred his stomach loose from his backbone. 

‘Joe, not to change, the subject- does the name Venuta mean 
an3'thing to j'ou?' 

He tried to answer before his tluroat tightened. ‘Not a thing,’ 

, he said. 

> ‘Come back as soon as you can,’ Kate said. ‘Tell Helen to 
¦¦¦“in. She’ll take over for you.’ 

Ill 

Joe packed his suitcase, went to the depot, and bought a ticket 
for Watsonville. At CastroviUe, the first station north, he got off 
and waited four hours for the Del Monte express from San 
Francisco to Monterey, which is the end of a spur line. In 
Monterey he clknbed the stairs of the Central Hotel, registered 
as John Vickcr. He went downstairs and ate a steak at Pop 
Ernst’s, bought a bottle of whisky, and retired to his room. 

He took off his shoes and liis coat and waistcoat, removed his 
collar and tie, and lay down on the bed. The whisky and a glass 

•476 



were on the table beside the brass bed. The overhead light shin- 
ing in his face didn’t bother him. He didn’t notice it. Methodic- 
: ally he primed Jiis brain with half a tumbler of whisky and tlicn 
he crossed his hands behind his head and crossed lus ankles and 
he brought out thoughts and impressions and perceptions and 
instincts and began matching them. 

It had been a good job and he had thought he had her fooled. 
Wellj he’d under-rated her. But how in hell had she got on to 
it he was wanted? He thought he might go to Reno or maj'be to 
Seattle. Seaport towns -always good. And tlien-now wait a 
minute. Think about it. 

Ethel didn’t steal nothing. She had something. Kate was 
scared of Ethel. Five hundred was a lot of dough to dig out a 
beat-up whore. What Ethel wanted to tell the judge was, num- 
ber one, true; and, number two, Kate was scared of it. Might be 
able to use that. HeU ! - not with her holding that jail-break over 
him. Joe wasn’t going to serve out the limit witli penalties. 

But no harm in thinking about it. Suppose he was to gamble 
four years against - well, let’s say ten^grand. Was that a bad bet? 
No need to, decide. She knew it before and she didn’t turn him 
in. Suppose she tltought he was a good dog. 

Maybe Ethel might be a hole-card. 

Now- wait- just think about it. Maybe it was the breaks. 
Maybe he ought to draw his hand and sec. But she was so god- 
dam smart. Joe wondered if he could play against her. But how, 
if he just played along? 

Joe sat up and filled his glass full. He turned off his light and 
raised his blind. And as he drank his whisky he watched a skinny 
little woman in a bathrobe washing her stockings in a basin in a 
room on tlie other side of the air-shaft. And the whisky mut- 
tered in his ears. 

It might be the breaks. God knows, Joe had waited long 
enough. God knows, he hated the bitch with her sharp little 
teeth. No need to decide right now. 

He raised his window quietly and threw the writing pen from 
the table against the window across the air-shaft. He enjoyed the 
scene of fear and apprehension before the skinny dame yanked 
her blind dowm. 

With the third glass of whisky the pint was empty. Joe felt a 
wish to go out in the street and look the town over. But tlicn his 
discipline took over. He had made a rule, and kept to it, nc\-cr 
to leave his room when he was drinking. That way a man nc\ er 
got in trouble. Trouble meant cops, and cops meant a check-up, 

477 


and that would surely mean a trip across the bay to San Quentin 
and no road.gang for good behaviour this time. He put.the street 


out of his mind. ' - , 

Joe had another pleasure he saved for times when he was 
, alone, and he was not aware it was a pleasure. He indulged it 
now. He lay on the brass bed and went back in tinie over' his 
sullen and miserable childhood and his fretful and vicious grow- 
ing up. No luck -he never got the breaks. The big shots got the 
breaks. A few snatch jobs he got away with, but the tray of 
. pocket-knives? Cops came right in his house and got him. Then 
he was on the books and they never let him alone. Guy in Daly 
City couldn’t shag a crate of strawberries off a truck witliour 
they’d pick up Joe. In school he didn’t have no luck, neither. 
Teachers against him, principal against him. Guy couldn’t take 
that crap. Had to get out 

Out of his memory’ of bad luck warm sadness grew, and he . 
¦ pushed it with more memories until the tears came to his eyes 
and his lips quivered with pity for the lonely lost boy he had 
been. And here he was now -look at liim-a rap against him, 
working in a whorehouse when other men had homes and cars. 
They were safe and happy and at night their blinds were pulled 
down against Joe. He wept quietly until he fell asleep. 

Joe got up at ten in the morning and ate a monster breakfast 
at Pop Ernst’s. In the early afternoon he took a bus to Watson- 
ville and played three games of snooker with a friend who came 
to meet him in answer to a phone call. Joe won the last game and 
racked his cue. He handed his friend uvo ten-doUar notes, 

‘Hell,’ said his friend, ‘I don’t want your money.’ 

‘Take it,’ said Joe, 

‘It ain’t like I give you anything,’ 

‘You give me plenty. You say she ain’t here and you’re the 
baby that would know.’ 

‘Can’t tell me what you want her for?’ 

‘Wilson, I tor you right first an’ I tell you now, I don't know. 
I’m jus’ doing a job of work.' 

‘Well, that’s all I can do. Seems like there was this conven- 
tion — what was it? - dentists, or maybe Owls. I don’t Imow 
whether she said she was going or I just figured if myself. 

1 got it stuck in my mind. Give Santa Cruz a whirl. Know 
anybody?’ 

‘I got a few acquaintances,’ said Joe. 


‘Look up H. V, Mahler. Hal Mahler. He runs Hal’s pool- 
room. Got a game in back.’ 


478 


‘Thanks,’ said Joe. 

‘No — look, Joe. I don’t want your money.’ 

‘It ain’t my money - buy a cigar,’ said Joe. 

The bus dropped him two doors from Hal’s place. It was 
suppertime but the stud game was still going. It was an hour 
before Hal got up to go to the can and Joe could follow and 
make a connection. 'Hal peered at Joe with large pale eyes made 
huge by thick glasses. He buttoned his fly slowly and adjusted 
his black alpaca sleeve guards and squared his green eyeshade. 
‘Stick aroimd till the game breaks,’ he said. ‘Care to sit in?’ 

‘How many playing for you, Hal?’ 

‘Only one.’ 

‘I’ll play for you.’ 

‘Five bucks an hour,’ said Hal. 

‘An’ ten per cent if I win?’ 

‘Well, okay. Sandy-haired fella Williams is the house.’ 

At one o’clock in the morning Hal and Joe went to Barlow’s 
Grill. 'Two rib steaks and french fries. You want soup?’ Hal 
asked Joe. 

‘No. And no french fries. They bind me up.’ 

‘Me too,’ said Hal. ‘But I eat them just the same. I don’t get 
enough exercise.’ 

Hal was a silent man until he was eating. He rarely spoke un- 
less his mouth was full. ‘What’s your pitch?’ he asked around 
steak. 

‘Just a job. I make a hundred bucks and you get twenty-five - 
okay?’ 

‘Got to have like proof - like papers?’ 

‘No. Be good but I’ll get by without them.’ 

‘Well, she comes in and wants me to steer for her. She wasn’t 
no good. I don’t take twenty a week off her. I probably wouldn’t 
of knew what become of her only Bill Primus seen her in my 
place and when thej^ found her he come in an’ ast me about her. 
Nice fella. Bill. We got a nice force here.’ 

Ethel was. not a bad woman - laz}’’, sloppy, but good-hearted. 
She wanted dignity and importance. She was just not \‘err 
bright and not very pretty and, because of these two lacks, 
very lucky. It would have bothered Ethel if she -had knoun t-*-. 
when they pulled her out of the sand where waves had 
half buried her skirts were pulled around her arse, v i- v... 
have liked more dignity. . ^ - 

Hal said, ‘We got some crazy bohunk bastard.^ in 
fleet. Get loaded with ink an’ they go nuts. '\"av I raT.-c-. o 

479 



found her, how about -welh how about taking her to New 
York? Keep her dose. _ . 

A funny notion came to Kate. That would be a comical mur- 
der, and a murder no one imder any circumstances could solve 
or.even suspect. Chocolates -boxes of chocolates, bowls of fond- 
ant, bacon, crisp bacon -fat; port wine, and then butter, every-, 
thing soaked in butter and whipped cream; no vegetables, no 
fruit -and no amusement either. Stay in the house, dear. I trust 
you. Look after things. You’re tired. Go to bed. Let me fill your 
glass. I got these new s\veets for you. Would you like to take the 
box to bed? Well, if you don’t feel good why don’t you take a 
physic? , These cachous are nice, don’t you tliinic? The old bitch 
would blow up and burst in six months. Or how about a tape- 
worm? Did anyone ever use tapeworms? Who was the man who 
couldn’t get water to his mouth in a sieve -Tantalus? 

Kate’s lips were smiling sweetly and gaiety was coming over 
her. Before she went it might be good to give a party for her 
sons. Just a simple little party witli a circus afterwards for her 
darlings -Her jewels. And then she thought of Aron’s beautiful 
face so like her own and a strange pain - a little collapsing pain 
-arose in her chest. He wasn’t smart. He couldn’t protect him- 
self. The dark brother might be dangerous. She had felt his 
quality. Cal had beaten her. Before she went away she would 
teach him a lesson. Maybe— why, sure -maybe a dose of the clap 
might set that young man back on his heels. 

Suddenly she knew that she did not want Aron to know 
about her. Maybe he could come to her in New York. He woulc 
think she had always lived in an elegant little house on the Eas 
Side. She would take him to the tlieatre, to the opera, and peopli 
would see them together and wonder at their loveliness, anc 
recognize that they were either brother and sister or mother anc 
son. No one could fail to know. They could go together tc 
Ethel’s funeral. She would need an oversize cofBn and six wrest- 
lers to cany it. Kate was so filled with amusement at hci 
thoughts that she did not hear Joe’s knocking on the door. Hf 
opened it a crack and looked in and saw her gay and smiling face. 

‘Breakfast,’ he said and nudged the door open with the edge 
of the linen-covered tray. He pushed the door closed with hi: 
knee. ‘Want it there?’ he asked and gestured towards the grej 
room with lus chin. 

‘No. I’ll have it right here. And I want a boiled egg and a 
piece of cinnamon toast. Four and a half minutes on the egg. 
Make sure. I don’t want it gooey.’ 

482 



Tou must feel better, ma’am.’ 

‘I do,’ she said. ‘That new medicine is wonderful. You look 
dragged by dogs, Joe. Don’t you feel well?’ 

‘I’m all right,’ he said and set the tray on the table in front of 
the big deep chair. ‘Four and a half minutes?’ 

‘That’s right. And if there’s a good apple -a crisp apple - 
bring that too.’ 

‘You ain’t et like this since I knew you,’ he said. 

Ill the kitchen, waiting for the cook to boil the egg, he was 
apprehensive. Maybe she knew. He’d have to be careful. But 
hell ! she couldn’t hate him for something he didn’t know. No 
crime in that. 

Back in her room he said, ‘Didn’t have no apples. He said 
this was a good pear.’ 

‘I’d like that even better,’ said Kate. 

He watched her chip off the egg and dip a spoon into the 
shell. ‘How is it?’ 

‘Perfect!’ said Kate. ‘Just perfect.’ 

‘You look good,’ he said. 

‘I feel good. You look like hell. What’s the matter?’ 

Joe went into it warily. ‘Ma’am, there ain’t nobody needs five 
hundred like I do.’ 

She said playfully, ‘There isn’t anyone who needs — ’ 

‘What?’ 

‘Forget it. What are you trying to say? You eouldn’t find her 
- is that it? Well, if you did a good job looking, you’ll get your 
five hundred. Tell me about it.’ She picked up the salt shaker 
and scattered a few grains into the open eggshell. 

Joe put an artificial joy on his face. ‘Thanks,’ he said. ‘I’m in 
a spot. I need it. Well, I looked in Pajaro and Watsonville. Got 
a line on her in Watsonville but she’d went to Santa Cruz. Got 
a smell of her there but she was gone.’ 

Kate tasted the egg and added more salt. ‘That all?’ 

‘No,’ said Joe. ‘I went it blind there. Dropped down to San 
Luis an’ she had been there too but gone.’ 

‘No trace? No idea where she went?’ 

Joe fiddled with his fingers. His whole pitch, maybe his whole 
life, depended on his next words, and he was reluctant to say 
them. 

‘Come on,’ she said at last. ‘You got something -what is 
it?! 

‘Well, it ain’t much. I don’t know what to think of it.’ 

‘Don’t think. Just tell. I’ll think,’ she said sharply. 

483 



'Might not even be true.’ 

‘For Christ’s sake!’ she said angrily, 

‘Well, I talked to the last guy that seen her. Guy. named Joe, 
like me — ’ ' 

‘Did you. get his grandmother!s name?’ she asked sarcastic- 
ally; 

‘This guy Joe says she loaded up on beer one night an’ she 
said how she’s, going to come back to Salinas an’ lay low. Then 
she dropped out of sight. This guy Joe didn’t know nothing 
more.’. - 

Kate was startled out of control. Joe read her quick start, the 
apprehension, and then the almost hopeless fear and weariness. 
Whatever it was, Joe had something. He had got the breaks at 
last. . . 

She looked up from her lap and her twisted fingersl ‘We’ll 
forget the old fart,’ she said. ‘You’ll get your five hundred, 
Joe.’ 

Joe breathed shallowly, afraid that any sound might drag her 
out of her self-absorption. She had believed him. More than 
that, she was believing things he had not told her. He wanted to 
get out of the room as quickly as possible. He said, ‘Thank you, 
ma’am,’ but very softly, and he moved silently towards the door. 

His hand was on the knob when she spoke with elaborate 
casualness. ‘Joe, by the way — ’ 

‘Ma’am?’ 

‘If you should hear anything about -her, let me know, will 
you?’ 

‘I sure will. Want me to dig into it?’ 

‘No. Don’t bother. It isn’t that important.’ 

In his room, with the door latched, Joe sat down and folded 
his arms. He smiled to himself. And instantly he began to work 
out the future course. He decided to let her brood on it till, say, 
next week. Let her relax, and then bring up Ethel again. He did 
not know what his weapon was or how he was going to use it. 
But he did know that it was very sharp and he itched to use 
it. He would have laughed out loud if he had known that Kate 
had gone to the grey room and locked its door, and that she sat, ' 
still in the big chair and her eyes were closed. 


484 


CHAPTER 46 


Sometimes, but not often, a rain comes to the Salinas 
Valley in November. It is so rare that the Journal or the Index 
or both carry editorials about it. The hills turn to a soft green 
over-night and the air smells good. Rain at this time is not par-' 
ticularly good in an agricultural sense unless it is going to con- 
tinue, and this is e-vtcemely unusual. More commonlj', the dr}^- 
ness comes back and the fuzz of grass withers or a little frost 
curls it and there’s that amount of seed wasted. 

The war years were wet years, and there were many people 
who blamed the strange intransigent weather on the firing of 
the great guns in France. This was seriously considered in 
articles and in arguments. 

We didn’t have many troops in France that first winter, but 
we had millions in training, getting ready to go. 

Painful as the war was, it was e.\citing too. The .Germans 
were not stopped. In fact, thej^ had taken the initiative again, 
driving methodically towards Paris, and God knew when they 
could be stopped - if they could be stopped at all. General Per- 
shing would save us if we could be saved. His trim, beautifully 
uniformed soldierly figure made its appearance in every paper 
every day. His chin was granite and there was no wrinkle on his 
tunic. He was the epitome of a perfect soldier. No one knew 
what he really thought. 

We knew we couldn’t lose and yet we seemed to be going 
about losing. You couldn’t buy flour, white flour, any more 
without taking four times the quantity of brown flour. Those 
who could aiford it ate bread and biscuits made with white flour 
and made mash for the chickens with the brown. 

In the old Troop C armoury the Home Guard drilled, men 
over fifty and not the best soldier material, but they took setting- 
up exercises twice a week, wore Home Guard buttons and over- 
seas caps, snapped orders at one another, and wrangled eternally 
about who should be officers. William C. Burt died right on the 
armoury floor in the middle of a push-up. His heart couldn’t 
take it. 

There were Minute Men too, so called because they made one- 
minute speeches in favour of America in moving-picture thcat 
and in churches. They had buttons too. 

The women rolled bandages and wore Red Cross 

485 



others objected to the war on moral or religious grounds and 
took the walk up Golgotha which normally comes of that. There 
were people who gave et'erjnhing tlicy load to the war because it ¦ 
was die last war and by winning it we would remove vrar like a 
thorn from the flesh of the world and there wouldn’t be any 
more such horrible nonsense.' 

There is no dignitj' in death in battle. Alostly that is a splash-, 
ing about of human meat and fluid, and the result is filth}’, but 
there is a great and almost sweet dignity in the , sorrow, the 
helpless, tlie hopeless sorrow, that comes down over a family 
with tlie telegram. Nothing to say, nothing to do, and only one 
hope -I hope he didn’t suffer -and what a forlorn and last- 
choice hope that is. And it is true that there were some people 
who, when their sorrow was beginning to lose its savour, gently 
edged it towards pride and felt increasingly important because 
of their loss. Some of these even made a good thing of it after 
the war was over. That is only natural, just as it is natural for a 
man whose function is the making of money to make money out 
of a war. No one blamed a man for that, but it was expected 
that he should invest a part of his loot in war bonds. Wc thought 
we invented all of it in Salinas, even the sorrow. ' 


CHAPTER47 

I 

I N T H E Trask house next to Rcynaud’s baker}’, Lee and Adam 
put up a map of the western front with lines of coloured pins 
snaking down, and this gave them a feeling of participation. 
Then Mr Kelly died and Adam Trask was appointed to take his 
place on the draft board. He was the logical man for the job. 
The ice plant did not take up much of his time, and he had a 
clear service record and an honourable discharge himself. 

Adam Trask had seen a war -a little war of manoeuwe and 
butcher}’, but at least he had experienced the re\’ersal,of the 
rules where a man is permitted to kill all the humans he can. 
Adam didn’t remember his war very well. Certain sharp pictures 
stood out in his memory, a man’s face, the piled and burning 
bodies, the clang of sabre scabbards at fast trot, the uneven, tear- 
ing sound of firing carbines, the thin cold voice of a bugle in the 
night. But Adam’s pictures were frozen. There was no motion 

48S 



or emotion in them -illustrations in the pages of a book, and 
not very well drawn. 

Adam worked hard and honestly and sadly. He could not get 
over the feeling that the young men he passed to the army were 
under sentence of death. And because he knew he was w’eak, he 
grew more and more stern and painstaking and much less likely 
to accept an excuse or a borderline disability. He took the lists 
home with him, called on parents, in fact, did much more work 
than was expected of him. He felt like a hanging judge who 
hates the gallows. 

Henry Stanton watched Adam grow more gaunt and more 
silent, and Henry was a man who liked fun - needed it. A sour- 
pussed associate could make him sick. 

‘Relax,’ he told Adam. ‘You’re trying to carry the weight of 
the war. Now, look -it’s not your responsibility. You got put in 
here with a set of rules. Just follow the rules and relax. You 
aren’t running the war.’ 

Adam moved the slats of the blind so that the late afternoon 
sun would not shine in his eyes, and he gazed down at the 
harsh parallel lines the sun threw on his desk. ‘I know,’ he said 
wearily. ‘Oh, I know that! But, Henry, it’s when there’s a 
choice, and it’s my own judgement of the merits, that’s when it 
gets me. I passed Judge Kendal’s boy, and he was killed in 
training.’ 

‘It’s not yoiu: business, Adam. Why don’t you take a few 
drinks at night? Go to a movie -sleep on it.’ Henry put his 
thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat and leaned back in his 
chair. ‘While v/e’re talking about it, Adam, it seems to me it 
don’t do a candidate a damn bit of good for you to worry. You 
pass boys I could be talked into letting off.’ 

‘I know,’ said Adam. ‘I wonder how long it will last?’ 

Henry inspected him shrewdly and took a pencil from his 
stuffed waistcoat pocket and rubbed the eraser against his big 
white front teeth. ‘I see what you mean,’ he said softly. 

Adam looked at him, startled. ‘What do I mean?’ he de- 
manded. 

‘Now don’t get huffy. I never thought I was lucky before, 

just having girls.’ . • t, !,• 

Adam traced one of the slat shadows on Iiis desk with his 
forefinger. ‘Yes,’ he said in a voice as soft as a sigh. ^ 

‘It’s a long time before your boys will be ^Iled up. 

‘Yes.’ Adam’s finger entered a line of hght and s 
back. 


489 



Henry said, ‘I’d hate to — ' 

‘Hate to what?’ 

‘I was just wondering how I’d feel if I Iiad to pass my own 
sons.’ . • ¦ • 

‘I'd resign,’ said Adam. ' . . 

'Yes, I can see that. A man would be tempted to reject them - 
I mean, his own.’ 

‘No,’ said Adam. ‘I’d resign because I couldn’t reject them. A 
man couldn’t let his own go free,’ 

Henry laced his fingers and made one big fist of his two 
hands and laid the fist on the desk in front of him. His face 
was, querulous. ‘No,’ he said, ‘you’re right. A man couldn’t.’ 
Henry' liked fun and avoided when he could any solemn or 
serious matter, for he confused these with sorrow. ‘How’s Aron 
doing at Stanford?’ 

‘Fine. He writes that it’s hard but he thinks he’ll make out all 
right. He’ll be home for Thanksgiving.’ 

‘I’d like to see him. I saw Cal on the street last night. There’s 
a smart boy.* 

‘Cal didn’t take college tests a year ahead,’ said Adam. 

‘Well, maybe that’s not what he’s cut out for. I didn’t go to 
college. Did you?’ 

‘No,’ said Adam. ‘I went into the army.’ 

'Well, it’s good experience. I’ll bet you wouldn’t take a good 
bit for the experience.’ 

Adam stood up slowly and picked his hat from the deer-horns 
on the wall. 'Good night, Henry,’ he said. 

II 

Wallcing home, Adam pondered liis responsibility’. As he passed 
j Reymaud’s Bakery’ Lee came our, carj'ing a golden loaf of French 
bread. 

‘I liavc a hunger for some garlic bread,’ Lee said. 

‘I like it with steak,’ said Adam. 

‘We’re having steak. Was there any mail ? ’ 

‘I forgot to look in the box,’ 

They entered the house and Lee went to the kitchen. In a 
moment Adam followed him and sat at the kitchen table. ‘Lee,’ 
he said, ‘suppose we send a boy to the army and he is killed, are 
w'e responsible?’ 

‘Go on,’ said Lee. T would rather have the whole thing at 
once.’ 


490 



‘Well, suppose there’s a slight doubt that the boy should be in 
the army and we send him and he gets killed.’ 

‘I see. Is it responsibUity or blame that bothers you?’ 

‘I don’t want blame.’ 

‘Sometimes responsibility is worse. It doesn’t carry any pleas- 
ant egotism.’ 

‘I was thinking about that time when Sam Hamilton and 700 
and I had a long discussion about a word,’ said Adam. .‘What 
was that word?’ 

‘Now I see. The word was timshel.’ 

‘Timshel — and you said — ’ 

‘I said that word carried a man’s greamess if he wanted to 
take advantage of it.’ 

‘I remember Sam Hamilton felt good about it.’ 

‘It set him fr^’ said Lee. ‘It gave him the right to be a man, 
separate from every other man.’ 

‘Thaf s lonely.’ 

‘All great and precious things are lonely.’ 

‘What is the word again?’ 

' ‘ri»2s//e/-thou mayest.’ 


1 1 1 

Adam looked forward to Thanksgiving when Aron would come 
home from college. Even though Aron had been away such a 
short time Adam had forgotten him and changed him the way 
any man changes someone he loves. With Aron gone, the silences 
w'ere the result of his going, and every little painful event was 
somehow tied to his absence. Adam found himself talking and 
boasting about his son, telling people who weren’t verj' in- 
terested how smart Aron was and how he had jumped a year c 
school. He thought it would be a good thing to have a res- 
celebration at Thanksgiving to let the boy know his effort ms 
appreciated. 

.Aron lived in a furnished room in Palo Alto, and he 
the mile to and from the campus every day. He was 
What- he had expected to find at the university had 
and beautiful. His picture -never really inspected -he - -^‘^7 
clean-eyed yoimg men and immaculate girls, all in 
robes and converging on a white temple on the ' 
wooded hill in the evening. Their faces were ' 
cated and their voices rose in chorus and it was 
but evening. He had no idea where he had . 
academic life -perhaps, from the Dore illu^' 

491 



failure although he vrorhed all the tiinc. He knetv et-erything 
about everybody back to the beginning of time. 

In the past, in the period of his success, pvo kinds of people 
had access to all homes and all gossip -the seamstress and the 
bandy man. Alf could tell you about e\-erybody on both sides of 
Main Street. He tvas a vicious male gossip, insariably curious 
and vindictive -without mab'cc. 

He looked at Joe and tried to place him. ‘I Imow you,’, he 
said. ‘Don’t tell me.’ 

Joe edged away. He was wary of people who knew him; 

‘Wait a minute. I got it. Kate’s. You work at Kate's,’ 

Joe sighed with relief. He had tliought Alf might have Imown 
him earlier. ‘That’s right,’ he said shortly. 

‘Never forget a face,’ said Alf. ‘Seen you when I built that 
crazy Ican-to for Kate. Now why in hell did she want that 
for? No window.’ 

‘Wanted it dark,’ said Joe. ‘Eyes bother her.’ 

Alf sniffed. He hardly e\'cr beliea-ed anything simple or good 
about anj’body. You could say good morning to Alf and he'd 
work it around to a password. He was convinced that treicryone 
lived secretly and that only he could see through them. 

He jerked his head back at Aluller’s. ‘Well, it’s a milestone,’ 
he said. ‘Nearly all tlie*old-timers gone. When Fartin’ Jenny 
goes that’ll be the end. And Jenny’s getting along.’ 

Joe was restless. He wanted to get away- and Alf knew he 
did. Alf was an avpert in people who rs-unted to get away from 
him. Come to think of it, maybe that’s why he carried his bag 
of stories. No one really went away when he could hear some 
juicy’ stuff about someone. Everybody is a gossip at heart. Alf 
was not liked for his gift but he was listened to. And he knew 
that Joe was on the point of making an excuse and getting out. 
It occurred to him tliat he didn’t know much about Kate’s place 
lately. Joe might trade him some new stuff for some old stuff. 
‘The old days was prem- good,’ he said. ‘ 'Course you’re just a 
kid.’ 

‘I got to meet a fella,’ said Joe. 

Alf pretended not to hear him. ‘You take Faye,’ he said. ‘She 
was a case,’ and, parenthetically, ‘You know Faye run , Kate’s 
pbcc. Nobody really knowa how’ Kate come to mm it. It was 
pretty mjatcrious, and there were some tliat load tlteir suspi- 
cions.’ He saw with satisfaction tl-uit the fella Joe was going to 
meet would wait a long time. 

‘What was tliej’ suspicious about?’ Joe asked. 

494 



‘Hell, you know how people talk. Probably notliins in it. But 
I got to admit it looked kind of f unny * 

‘Like to have a beer?’ Joe asked. 

‘Now you got sometliing there,’ said Alf. ‘They say a fella 
jumps from a funeral to the bedroom. I ain’t as young as I was. 
Funeral makes me thirsty. The Nigger was quite a citizen. I 
could tell you stuff about her. I’ve knew her for thirty-five - no, 
thirty-seven years.’ 

‘Who was Faye?’ Joe asked. 

They went iiito Mr Griffin’s saloon. Mr Griffin didn’t like 
anything about liquor, and he hated drunks with a deadly scorn. 
He owned and operated GriflBn’s Saloon on Main Street, and on 
a Saturday night he might refuse to serve twenty men he thought 
had had enough. The result was that he got the best trade in his 
cool, orderly, quiet place. It was a saloon in which to make deals 
and to talk quietly without interruption. 

Joe and Alf sat at the round table at the back and had three 
beefs apiece. Joe learned everything true and untrue, founded 
and unfounded, every ugly conjecture. Out of it he got com- 
plete confusion but a few ideas. Something might have been not 
exactly on the level about the death of Faye. Kate might be the 
wife of Adam Trask. He hid that quickly -Trask might want to 
pay off. The Faye thing might be too hot to touch. Joe had to 
think about that -alone. 

At the end of a couple of hours Alf was restive. Joe had not 
played ball. He had traded nothing, not one single piece of in- 
formation or guess. Alf found himself thinking. Fella that close- 
mouthed must have something to hide. Wonder who would have 
a line on him? 

Alf said finally, ‘Understand, I like Kate. She gives me a job 
now and then and she’s generous and quick to pay. Probably 
nothing to all the palaver about her. Still, when you think of it^ 
she’s a pretty cold piece of woman. She’s got a real bad eye. You 
think?’ 

‘I get along fine,’ said Joe. 

Alf was angry at Joe’s perfidy, so he put in a needle. ‘I had a 
funny idea,’ he said. ‘It was when I built that lean-to without no 
window. She laid that cold eye on me one day and the idea 
come to me. If she knew all the things I heard, and^she 
offer me a drink or even a cup-cake - why, I’d say, “No, th.^.--^ 
you, ma’am.” ’ - ^ 

Me and her get along just fine,’ said Joe. ‘I got to iru. 
guy.’ 


495 



We have tomorrow and Fridaj' and Satiurday and all day Sun- 
day. Would you mind not coming in tonight?’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘I’ll tell you later.’ 

‘I want to know now.’ 

‘Well, my father’s got one of his streaks.’ 

‘Against me?’ . ^ 

‘Yes. I can’t go to dinner with you tomorrow, but I won’t eat 
-much at home, so you can tell Lee to save a plate for me.’ 

He was turning shy. She could fed it in the relaxing grip on 
her arm and in his silence, and she could sec it in his raised 
face. ‘I shouldn’t have told you that tonight.’ 

‘Yes, you should,’ he said slowly. ‘Tell me the truth. Do you 
still want to be with me?’ 

‘Yes, I do.’ 

‘Then all right. I’ll go away now. We’ll talk tomorrow.’ 

He left her on the porch with the feeling of a light-brushed 
kiss on her lips. She felt hurt that he had agreed so casDy, and 
she laughed sourly at herself that she could ask a thing and be 
hurt when she got it. She watched the tall quick step through 
the radiance of the corner street-light. She thought, I must be 
crazy. I’ve been imagining tilings. , ' ' 

II 

In his bedroom after he had said good night, Aron sat on the 
edge of his bed and peered down at his hands cupped between 
his knees. He felt let down and helpless, packed like a bird’s egg 
in the cotton of his father’s ambition for him. He had notlmown 
its strength until tonight, and he wondered whether he would 
have the strengtli to break free of its soft, persistent force. His 
thought.s would not coagulate. The house seemed cold with a 
dampness that made him shiver. He got up and softly opened 
the door. There was a light under Gil’s door. He tapped and 
went in without waiting for a reply. 

Gil sat at a new desk. He was working with tissue paper and 
a bolt of red ribbon, and as .Aron came in he hastily covered 
something on his desk with a large blotter. 

Aron smiled. ‘Presents?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Gil, and left it at that. 

‘Gin I talk to you ?’ 

‘Sure! Come on in. Talk low or Father will come in. He hates 
to miss a moment.’ 


502 



Aron sat down on the bed. He was silent so Ion;' that ( 4 \l 
asked, ‘What’s the matter -you got trouble?' 

‘No, not trouble. I just wanted to talk to yon. Cak 1 iloii'i 
want to go on at college.’ 

Cal’s head jerked round. ‘You don’t? WJiy not ?’ 

‘I just don’t like it.’ 

‘You haven’t told Father, have you? He’ll be dkti^poiiKt.-d. 
It’s bad enough that I don’t want to go, Wiial do you tva/i( (o 
do?’ 

‘I thought I’d like to take over the ranch.’ 

‘How about Abra?’ 

‘She told me a long time ago that’s what she’d h'l:e,’ 

Cal studied him. ‘The ranch has got a lca.se to nut,’ 

‘Well, I was just thinking about it.’ 

Cal said, ‘There’s no money in farming.’ 

‘I don’t want much money. Just to get along.’ 

‘Tliads not good enough for me,’ said Cal. 'I v/ant a lot of 

money and I’m going to get it too.’ 

‘How?’ 


Cal felt older and surer than his brother. He felt prouxti'/c 
towards him. ‘If you’ll go on at college, v/hy. I'll get efarf//! and 
lay in a foundation. Then when you finish v/c can be partne/"., 
I’ll have one land of thing and you’ll have a.tofher. Tha* 
might be pretty good.’ 

‘I don’t want to go back. Why do I have to go back?’ 

‘Because Father wants you to.’ 

That won’t make me go.’ 

Cal stared fiercely at his brother, at the pale hair arrl tr, 
set eyes, and suddenly he knew v/hy hie father lovc-rJ Arc; 
it beyond doubt. ‘Sleep on it,’ he said quickly, 'It 'rx 
ter if you fim'shed cut the term at least. Don’t do ar,^th..og 

Aron got up and moved tcv/ardo the door, 'Who’r, the 
for?’ he asked- 


, kr.r/r 


‘Control what? I don’t know what you’re talking about?’ 

Lee said, ‘Can't you hear me? Can’t I get through to you? 
^1, don’t you know what I’m saying?’ 

‘I hear j'ou, Lee. What are j-ou saying?’ 

‘He couldn’t help it, Cal. That's his nature. It was the onlj' 
v/ay he knew'. He didn’t have any choice. But you have. Don’i 
you hear me? You have a choice.’ 

The spirals had become so small that the pencil lines ran 
. togcdter and the result was a shiny black dot. 

Cal said quietly, ‘Aren’t you making a fuss about nothing: 
You must be slipping. You’d think from your tone that I’d 
killed somebody. Come off it, Lee. Come off it.’ 

It was silent in the room. After a moment Cal turned from hi: 
desk and the room was empty. A cup of coffee on the bureau toj 
sent up a plume of vapour.* Cal drank the coffee scalding as i( 
was and went into tlie living-room. 

His father looked up apologetically at him. 

Cal said, Tm sorrj’. Father. I didn’t know how you felt aboui 
it.’ He took the package of money from where it lay on tht 
mantel and put it in the inside pocket of his coat where it had 
been before. Til see what I can do about this.’ He said casually 
‘Where are the. others?’ 

‘Oh, Abra had to go. Aron walked with her. Lee wchl 
out.’ 

‘I guess I’ll go for a walk,’ said Cal. 

IV 

The November night was well fallen. Cal opened the front dr 
:/'''a crack and saw Lee’s shoulders and head outlined against 
white walls of the French Laundry across the street, tee 

itting on the steps, and he looked lumpy in his heavy cOat. 

.Cal closed the door quietly and went back through the livi 
room. ‘Champagne makes you thirsty,’ he said. His father d' 
lookup. 

Cal slipped out by the kitchen door and moved through ¦ 
waning kitchen garden. He climbed the high fence, foi'. 
two-by-twclve plank that served as a bridge across the slf. 
dark tratcr, and came out between Lang’s Bakery and ' 
smith shop on Castroville Street. 

He wallted to Stone Street where the Catholic chure 
nirncd left, v'ent past the Carriaga house, the Wilson I 
•Zabala house, and turned left on Central Avenue at f 

512 



beck house. Two blocks out Central he turned left past the West 
End School. 

The poplar trees in front of the school-yard were nearly bare, 
but in the evening wind a few yellowed leaves stiU moisted down. 

Cal’s mind was numb. He did not even know that the air was 
cold with frost slipping down from the mountains. Three blocks 
ahead he saw his brother cross under a street-light, coming to- 
wards him. He knew it was his brother by stride and posture 
and because he knew it. 

Cal slowed his steps, and when Aron was close he said, “Hi. I 
came looking for you.’ 

Aron said, ‘I’m sorry about this afternoon.’ 

‘You couldn’t help it -forget it.’ He turned and two walked 
side by side. ‘I want you to come with me,’ Cal said. ‘I want to 
show you something.’ 

‘What is it?’ / 

‘Oh, it’s a surprise. But it’s very interesting. You’ll be in- 
terested.’ 

‘Well, will it take long?’ 

‘No, not very long. Not very long at all.’ 

They walked past Central Avenue towards Castrov'iUe Street. 

V 

Sergeant Axel Dane ordinarily opened the San Jose recruiting 
office at eight o’clock, but if he was a little late Corporal Kemp 
opened it, and Kemp was not likely to complain. Axel was not 
an unusual case. A hitch in the US Army in the time of peace 
between the Spanish war and the German war had unfitted him 
for the cold, ordered life of a civilian. One month between 
hitches convinced him of that. Two hitches in the peacetime 
army completely unfitted him for war, and he had learned 
enough method to get out of it. The San Jose recruiting station 
proved he knew his way about. He was dallying with the 
youngest Ricci girl and she lived in San Jose. 

Kemp hadn’t the time in, but he was learning the basic rule. 
Get along with the topkick and avoid all officers when pos- 
sible. He didn’t mind the gentle riding Sergeant Dane handed 
out. 

At eight-thirty Dane entered the office to find Coiporal Kemp 
asleep at his d^k and a tired-looking kid sat waiting. Dane 
glanced at the boy and then went behind the rail and p''^\ 
hand on Kemp’s shoulder. 


513 



‘Darling,’, he said, ‘the sk3'larks are singing and a new dawn 
is here,’ • ¦ 

.Kemp raised his head from his arms, wiped his nose on the 
back of his hand, and sneezed. ‘That’s my sweet,’ the sergeant 
said. ‘Arise, tve have a customer.’ 

Kemp squinted his crusted e%-es. ‘The war will ww,’ he 
said. 

- Dane looked more closely at the boy. ‘God ! he’s beautiful. I 
hope they take good care of him. Corporal, j'ou may think that 
he wants to bear arms against the foe, but I think he’s runriing 
away from love.’ ¦ 

Kemp tvas reliwed that the sergeant wasn’t quite sober. ‘You 
think some dame hurt him?’ He plaj-ed any game his sergeant 
wished. *¥00 think it’s the Foreign Legion?’ 

‘Maybe he’s running away from himself.’ 

Kemp said, ‘I saw that picture. There’s one mean son of a 
bitch of a sergeant in it.’ 

don’t believe it,’ said Dane. ‘Step up, young man. Eighteen, 
aren’t you?’ 

'Yes, sir.’ 

Dane turned to his man. ‘What do j'ou think?’ . . 

‘Hell!’ said Kemp. ‘I say if they’re big enough, they’re old 
enough.’ 

The sergeant said, ‘Let’s say j'ou’re eighteen. And we’ll stick 
to it, shall we?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

‘You just take this form and fill it out. Now you figure out 
what year you were bom, and you put it down right here, and 
3-ou remember it.’ 


CHAPTER 50 

» 

I 

Joe didn’t like for Kate to sit still and stare straight ahead 
-hour after hour. That meant she was thinking, and since her 
face had no e.xpression Joe had no access to her thoughts. It 
made him uneas3x He didn’t want his first real good break to get 
away from him. 

He had only one plan himself— and that was to keep her 
stirred up until she gave herself away. Then he could jump in 

514 



any direction. But bow about it if she sat looking at the wall? 
Was she stirred up or wasn’t she? 

Joe knew she hadn’t been to bed, and when he asked whether 
or not she wanted breakfast she shook her head so slowly that it 
was hard to know whether she had heard him or not. 

He advised himself cautiously, ‘Don’t do notlung? Just stick 
around and keep your eyes and ears open.’ The girls in the 
house knew something had happened but no two of them had 
the same story, the goddam chicken-heads. 

Kate was' not thinking. Her mind drifted among impressions 
the way a bat drifts and swoops in the et^ening. She saw the face 
of the blond and beautiful boy, his eyes mad with shock. She 
heard his ugly words aimed not so much at her as at himself. 
And she saw his dark brother leaning against the door and 
laughing. 

Kate had laughed too -the quickest and best self-protection. 
What would her son do? What had he done after he went 
quietly awaj*^? 

She thought of Cal’s e5'es with their look of sluggish and ful- 
filled cruelty, peering at her as he slowly closed the door. 

Why had he brought his brother? Vi^t did he want? What 
was he after? If she knew she could take care of herself. But 
she didn’t know. 

The pain was creeping in her hands again and there was a 
new place. Her right hip ached angrily when she moved. She 
thought, ‘So the pain will move in towards the centre, and 
sooner or later all the pains will meet in the centre and join like 
rats in a clot.’ 

In' spite of 'his advice to himself, Joe couldn’t let it alone. He 
carried a pot of tea to her door, knocked softly, opened the door, 
and went in. As far as he could see she hadn’t moved. 

He said, T brought you some tea, ma’am.’ 

Tut it on the table,’ she said, and then as a second thought, 
‘Thank you, Joe.’ 

‘You don’t feel good, ma’am?’ 

’ ‘The pain’s back. The medicine fooled me.’ 

‘Anything I can do ?’ 

She raised her hands. ‘Cut these off -at the wrists.’ She 
grimaced with the extra pain lifting her hands had causec. 
‘Makes you feel hopeless,’ she said plaintively. 

Joe had never heard a tone of weakness in her before 
instinct told him it was time to mo^'e in. He said, -Ala' 
don’t want me to bother you but I got some word al 

515 



other.' Hc 'knetv by the little, interval before, she answered diat 
she had tensed. ' • ' . 

‘What other?’ she asked softly. 

‘That dame, ma’^.’ 

‘Oh! You mean Ethel?’ 

‘Yes, ma’am.'. 

‘Fm getting tired of Ethel. What is it now?' 

‘Well, FU tell you like it happened. I can’t make nothing out 
of it. I’m in Kellogg’s cigar store and a fclla came up to me. 
"You’re Joe,” he says, an’ I tell him, "Who says?” "You was 
lookin’ for somebodjy” he saj’s. “Tell me about it,” I says. Never 
seen the guy before. So he saj-s, “That party tol’ me she wants to 
talk to you.” An’ I told him, “Well, why don’t she?” He gives 
me the long look an’ he says, “Maybe you forgot what die judge 
said.” I guess he means about her coming back.’ He looked at 
Kate’s fac.e, still and pale, the eyes looking straight shcad; 

Kate said, ‘And then he asked you for some money?' 

‘No, ma’am. He didn’t. He says sometlting don’t make no 
sense. He saj-s, “Does Faye mean anything to you?" "Not a 
thing,” I tol’ him.^ He says, “Maybe you better talk to her.” 
“Ma3-bc,” I says, an’ I come away. Don’t make no sense to me. 
I figured I’d ask you,’ 

Kate asked, ‘Docs the name Faye mean anythbg to you?'. 

‘Not a thing.’ 

Her voice became very soft. ‘You mean you never heard that 
Faye used to own this house?’ 

Joe felt a sickening jolt in the pit of his stomach. What a god- 
dam fool ! Couldn’t keep his mouth shut. His mind floundered. 
‘Why - why come to think erf it, 1 believe I did hear that - 
seemed Iflw the name was like Fpith.’ 

The sudden alarm was good for Kate. It took the blond head 
and the pain from her. It gave her something to do. She 
responded to the challenge with something like pleasure. 

She laughed softly. ‘Faith,’ she said under her breath. ‘Pour- 
me some tea, Joe.’ 

She did not appear to notice that his hand shook and that the 
teapot spout rattled against the cup. She did not look at him 
even when he set the cup before her and then stepped back out , 
of range of her eyes. Joe was quaking with apprehension. 

Kate said in a pleading voice, ‘Joe, do you think you could 
help me? If I gave you ten thousand dollars, do you think you 
could fix cvciything up?’ She waited just a second, then swung 
round and looked full in his face. 

516 



His eyes were moist. She caught him h’cking his lips. And at 
her sudden move he stepped back as though she had struck at 
him. Her eyes would not let him go. - ' 

‘Did I catch you out, Joe?’ 

‘I don’t know what you’re getting at, ma’am.’ 

‘You go and figure it out -and then you come and tell me. 
You’re good at figuring things out. And send Therese in, will 
you?’ 

He wanted to get out of this room where he was out-jjointed 
and out-fought. He’d made a mess of things. He wondered if 
he’d bollixed up the breaks. And then the bitch had the nerve to 
say, ‘Thank you for bringing tea. You're a nice boy,’ 

He wanted to slam the door, but he didn’t dare. 

Kate got up stiffly, . trying to avoid the pain of moving her 
hip. She went to her desk and slipped out a sheet of paper. 
Holding the pen was difficult. 

She wrote, moving her whole arm. ‘Dear Ralph; Tell the 
sherifli it wouldn’t do any harm to check on Joe Valery’s finger- 
prints. You remember Joe. He works for me. Y’rs, Kate.’ She 
was folding the paper when Therese came in, looking frightened. 

‘You want me? Did I do something? I tried my best. Ma’am, 
I ain’t been well.’ 

'Come here,' Kate said, and while the girl waited beside the 
desk Kate slowly addressed the envelope and stamped it. ‘I 
want you to run a little errand for me,’ she said. ‘Go to Bell’s 
candy store and get a five-pound box of mixed chocolates and 
a one-pound box. The big one is for you girls. Stop at Krough’s 
drugstore and get me two medium toothbrushes and a can of 
tooth-powder -you know, that can with a spout?’ 

‘Yes, ma’am.’ Therese was greatly relieved. 

‘You're a good girl,’ Kate went on. ‘I’ve had my eye on you. 
I’m not well, Therese. If I see that you do this well, I’ll seriously 
consider putting you in charge when I go to the hospital.’ 

‘You will -are -arc you going to the hospital?’ 

‘I don’t know yet, dear. But I’ll need your help. Now here’s 
some money for the candy. Medium toothbrushes - remember.’ 

' ‘Yes, ma’am. Thank you. Shall I go now?’ 

‘Yes, and kind of creep out, will you? Don’t let the other girls 
know what I told you,’ 

‘I’ll go out the back way.’ She hurried towards the door. 

Kate said, ‘I nearly forgot. Will you drop this in a mail-box?’ 

‘Sure I will, ma’am. Sure I will. Anything else?’ 

‘That’s all, dear.’ 


517 



When the girl was gone Kate rested her arms and hands on ¦ 
the desk so that each crooked finger was supported. Here it was. 
Maybe she had always known. She must have- but there was 
no need to think of that now. She would come back to tliat.. 
They would put Joe away, but there’d be someone else, and 
there was always Ethel. Sooner or later, sooner or later - but no 
need to think about that notv. She tiptoed her mind around the 
whole subject and back to an exclusive thing -that peeped out 
and then withdrew. It was when she had been thinking of her 
yellow-haired son that the fragment had first come to her mind. 
His face -hurt, bewildered, despairing - had brought it. Then 
she remembered. ^ 

She was a very small girl with a face as lovely and fresh as her 
son's face - a very small girl. Most of the time she knew she was 
smarter and prettier than anyone else. But now and then a 
lonely fear would fall upon her so that she seemed surrounded 
by a tree-tall forest of enemies. Then every thought and word 
and look was aimed to hurt her, and she had no place to run and 
no place to hide. And she would cry in panic because there was 
no escape and no sanctuary. Then one day she was reading a 
book. She could read when she was five years old. She remem- 
bered the book -brown, with a silver title, and the cloth was 
broken and the boards thick. It was Alice in Wonderland. 

Kate moved her hands slowly and lifted her weight a little 
from her arms. And she could see the drawings - Alice with long 
straight hair. But it was the bottle which said ‘Drink me’ that 
had changed her life. Alice had taught her that. 

When the forest of her enemies surrounded her she was pre- 
pared. In her pocket she had a bottle of sugar water and on its 
red-framed label she had written, ‘Drink me’. She would take a 
sip from the bottle and she would grow smaller and smaller. Let 
her enemies look for her then! Cathy would be tmder a leaf or 
looking out of an ant-hole, laughing. They couldn’t find her 
then. No door could close her out and no door could close her 
in. She could walk upright under a door. 

And always there was Alice to play with, Alice to love her and 
trust her. Alice was her friend, always waiting to welcome her 
to tinyncss. 

All this so good - so good that it was almost worth while to 
be miserable. But good as it was, there was one more thing 
always held in reserve. It was her threat and her safety. She had 
only to drink the whole bottle and she would dwindle and dis- 
appear and cease to exist. And better than all, when she stopped 

518 


being, she never would have been. This was her darling safety-. 
Sometimes in her bed she would drink enough of ‘Drinl^ me’ so 
that she was a dot as small as the tiniest gnat. But she had 
ne\"er gone clear out - never had to. That was her resen-e - 
guarded from everyone. 

Kate shook her head sadly, remembering the cut-off little girl. 
She wondered why she had forgotten that wonderful trick. It 
had saved her from so many disasters. The light filtering down 
at' one through, a clover-leaf was glorious. Cathy and Alice 
walked among tov/ering grass, arms around each other - best 
friends. And Cathy never had to drink all of ‘Drink me’ because 
she had Alice. 

Kate put her head down on the blotter between her crooked 
hands. She was cold and desolate, alone and desolate. Whatever 
she had done, she had been driven to do. She was different - she 
had something more than other people. She raised her head and 
made no move to wipe her streaming ej^es. That was true. She 
was smarter and stronger than other people. She had something 
they lacked. 

And right in the middle of her thought. Cal’s dark face hung 
in the air in front of her and his lips were smiling with cruelty. 
The weight pressed down on her, forcing her breath out 

They had something she lacked, and she didn’t know what it 
w'as. Once she knew this, she was ready; and once ready, she 
knew she had been ready for a long time -perhaps all her life. 
Her mind functioned like a wooden mind, her body moved 
crookedly like a badly operated marionette, but she went steadily 
about her business. 

It was noon — she knew from the chatter of the girls in the 
, dining-room. The slugs had only just got up. 

Kate liad trouble with the door-knob and turned it finally by 
rolling it between her palms. 

The girls choked in the middle of laughter and looked up at 
her. The cook came in from the kitchen. 

Kate was a sick ghost, crooked and in some W'ay horrible. She 
leaned across the dining-room wall and smiled at her girls, and 
her smile frightened them even more, for it was like the frame 
for a scream. 

‘Where’s Joe?’ Kate asked. 

‘He went out, ma’am.’ 

‘Listen,’ she said. ‘I’ve Iiad no sleep for a long time. I’_m going 
to take some medicine and sleep. I don’t want to be disf ~"d, 
I don’t want any supper. I’ll sleep the clock ) 

519 



don’t want anybody to come near me for anything nntil to- 
morrow morning. Do you understand?’ 

'YeSj ma’am,’ they said. 

‘Good night then. It’s afternoon but I mean good night.’ 

‘Good night, ma’am,’ they chorused obediently. 

Kate turned and walked crabwise back to her room. , 

She closed her door and stood looking around, trying to form 
her simple procedure. She went back to her desk. This time she 
forced her hand, in spite of the pain, to write .plainly. ‘I leave . 
everything I have to my son Aron Trask.’ She dated the sheet 
and signed it ‘Catherine Trask’. Her fingers dwelt on the page, 
and then she got up and left her will face, upward on the 
desk. 

At the centre table she poured cold tea into her cup and ' 
carried the cup to the grey room in the lean-to and set it on the 
reading-table. Then she went to her dressing-table and combed 
her hair, rubbed a little rouge all over her face, covered it lightly 
with powder, and put on the pale lipstick she always used. Last 
she filed her nails and cleaned them. 

When she closed the door to the grey room the outside light 
was cut off and only the reading-lamp threw its cone on the 
table. She arranged the pillows, patted them up, and sat down. 
She leaned her head experimentally against tlte down pillow. 
She felt rather gay, as though she was going to a party. Gingerly 
she fished the chain out from her bodice, unscrewed the little 
tube, and shook the capsule into her hand. She smiled at it. 

‘Eat me,’ she said' and put the capsule in her mouth. 

She picked up the tea-cup. ‘Drink me,’ she said and swal- 
lowed the bitter cold tea. 

She forced her mind to stay on Alice -so tiny and 'waiting. 

, Other faces peered in from the sides of her eyes - her father and 
‘mother, and Charles, and Adam, and Samuel Hamilton, and- 
then Aron, and she could see Cal smiling at her. 

He didn’t have to speak. The glint of his eyes said, ‘You 
missed something. They had something and you missed it.’ 

She thrust her mind back to Ahce. In the grey wall opposite 
there was a nail-hole. Alice would be in there. And she would 
put her arm around Cathy’s waist, and Cathy would put her 
arm around Alice’s waist, and they would walk away - best 
friends - and tiny as the head of a pin. 

A warm numbness began to creep into her arms and legs. The 
pain was going from her hands. Her eyelids felt heavy - very 
heavy. She yawned. 


520 



She thought or said or thought, ‘Alice doesn’t know. I’m • 
going right on past.’ 

Her eyes closed and a diazy nausea shook her. She opened her 
eyes and stared about in terror. The grey room darkened and the 
cone of light flowed and rippled like water. And then her eyes 
closed again and her fingers curled as though they held small 
breasts. And her heart beat solemnly and her breathing slowed 
as she grew smaller and smaller and then disappeared - and she 
had never been. 


II 

When Kate dismissed him Joe went to the barber-shop, as he 
always did when he was upset. He had his hair cut and an egg 
shampoo and tonic. 'He had a facial massage and a mud pack, 
and around the edges he had his nails manicured, and he had his 
shoes shined. Ordinarily this and a new necktie set Joe up, but 
he was still depressed when he left the barber with a fifty-cent 
tip. 

¦ Kate had trapped him like a rat — caught him with his pants 
down. Her fast thinking left him confused and helpless. The 
trick she had of leaving it to you whether she meant anything or 
not was no less confusing. 

The night started dully, but then sixteen members and two 
pledges from Sigma Alpha Epsilon, Stanford chapter, came in 
hilarious from a pledge hazing in San Juan. They were full of 
horse-play. 

Florence, who smoked the cigarette in the circus, had a hard 
cough. Every time she tried, she coughed and lost it. And the 
pony stallion had diarrhoea. 

The college boys shrieked and pounded each other in their 
amusement. And then they stole everything that wasn’t nailed 
dotvn. 

After they had left, two of the girls got into a tired and mono- 
tonous quarrel, and Therese turned up with the first symptom 
of the old Joe. Oh, Christ, what a night ! 

And down the hall that brooding dangerous thing ^\'as silent 
behind its closed door. Joe stood b}' the door before he went to 
bed and he could hear nothing. He closed the house at two- 
thirty and was in bed by three -but he couldn’t sleep. He sat up 
in bed and read seven chapters of The Winning of Barbara 
Worth, and when it was daylight went dowm to the silent kit- 
chen and made a pot of coffee. 


521 



• He rested his elbows on the table and held the coffee mug 
with both hands. Something had gone wrong and Joe couldn’t 
figure what it was. Maybe she’d found out that Ethel was dead. 
He’d have to watch his step. And then he made up his mind, 
arid made it up firmly. He would go in to see her at nine and 
he’d' keep his ears open. Maybe he hadn’t heard right. Best 
thing would be to lay it on the line and not be a hog. Just say 
he’d take a thousand bucks and get the hell out, and if she said 
no he’d get the hell out anyway. He was sick of working with 
dames. He could get a job dealing faro in Reno - regular hours 
and no dames. Maybe get himself an apartment and fix it up- 
big chairs and a davenport. No point in beating his brains out 
in this lousy town. Better if he got out of the state anjnvay. He 
considered going right now -just get up from this table, climb 
the stairs, two minutes to pack a suitcase, and gone. Three or 
four minutes at the most. Don’t tell nobody nothing. The idea 
appealed to him. The breaks about Ethel might not be as good 
as he had thought at first, but a thousand bucks was at stake. 
Better wait. 

When the cook came in he was in a bad mood. He had a de- 
veloping carbuncle on the back of his neck and the skin from 
the inside of an eggshell stretched over it to draw it to a head. 
He didn’t want anybody in his kitchen, feeling the way he 
did. 

Joe went back to his room and read some more and then he 
packed his suitcase. He was going to get out any way it went. 

At nine o’clock he knocked gently on Kate’s door and pushed 
it open. Her bed had not been slept in. He set down the tray and 
went to the door of the lean-to and knocked and knocked again 
and then called. Finally he opened the door. 

The cone of light fell on the reading-stand. Kate’s head was 
deeply cushioned on a pillow. 

/ ‘You must have slept all night here,' Joe said. He walked 
around in front of her, saw bloodless lips and eyes sliining dully 
bcUveen half-closed lids, and he knew she was dead. 

He moved his head from side to side and went quickly into 
the other room to make sure that the door to the hall was closed; 
•With great speed he went through the dres.scr, drawer by 
.drawer, opened her purses, the little box by her bed -and he 
stood still. She didn’t have a goddam thing -not even a silver- 
backed hair-brush. 

He crept to the lean-to and stood in front of her -not a ring, 
not a pin. Then he saw the link chain around her neck and 

522 


lifted it clear and unsnapped the clasp -a small gold watch, a 
little tube, and two safe-deposit keys, numbers 27 and 29. 

‘So that’s where you got it, you bitch,’ he said. 

He slipped the watch off the thin chain and put it in his 
pocket. He wanted to punch her on the nose. Then he thought 
of her desk. ¦ 

The two-line holograph will attracted him. Somebody might 
pay for that. He put it in his pocket. ,He took a handful of 
papers from a pigeon-hole - bills and receipts; next hole, in- 
surance; next, a small book with records of every girl. He put 
that in his pocket too. He took the rubber band from a packet of 
brown envelopes, opened one, and pulled out a photograph. On 
the back of the picture, in Kate’s neat, sharp handwriting, a 
name and address and a tide. 

Joe laughed aloud. This was the real breaks. He tried another 
envelope and another. A gold mine -guy could live for years on 
these. Look at that fat-arsed councilman! He put the band back. 
In the top drawer eight ten-dollar notes and a bunch, of kej's. 
He pocketed the money too. As he opened the second drawer 
enough to see that it held writing paper and sealing wax and ink 
there was a knock on the door. He walked to it and opened it a 
crack. 

The cook said, ‘Fella out here wants to see ya.’ 

‘Who is he?’ 

‘How the hell do I know?’ ' 

Joe looked back at the room and then stepped out, took the 
key from the inside, locked the door, and put the key in his 
pocket. He might, have overlooked something. 

Oscar .Noble was standing in the big front room, his grey feat 
on his head and his red mackinaw buttoned up tight around his 
throat. His eyes were pale grey— the same colour as his stnebk 
whiskers. The room was in semi-darkness. No one had raised 
the blinds yet. 

Joe came lightly along the hall, and Oscar asked, 'koii Joe.' 
‘Who’s asking?’ 

‘The sheriff -wants to have a talk vdth you.’ ^ ‘r r 

Joe felt ice creeping into his stomach. ‘Pinch.'’ he asked, o 
a warrant?’ 

‘Hell, no,’ said Oscar, ‘We got nothing on you. J 
up. Will you come along?’ 

‘Sure,’ said Joe. ‘Why not?’ 

The}- went out together. Joe shivered, 
coat.’ 


523 


. .Quinn lifted the ends of his fine wide moustache wath the 
back of his forefinger. ‘You knew her, didn’t you?' 

‘Well, not to know. I knew who she was.’ 

Quirih put his elbows on his desk and leaned forwardi /Sh 
down, I want to talk to you.’ . ¦ : 

His visitor drew up a chair. His fingers picked at a cotton 
button. . , ' " - ¦ ¦ ' ¦ 

¦ The sheriff asked, ‘Was Kate blackmailing you?’ , , 

• ‘Certainly not. Why should she?’ . , 

‘I’m asking you as a friend. You know she’s dead. You ;ain 
tell me.’ ’ • 

, ‘I don’t know what you’re getting at -nobody’s blackmailing 
me.’ 

Quinn slipped a photograph from its envelope, turned it like 
a playing card, and skiddal it across the desk. 

His visitor adjusted his glasses and the breath wliistled in liis 
nose. ‘Jesus Christ,’ he said softly. 

‘You didn’t know she had it?’ 

‘Oh, I knew it all right. She let me know. For Christ’s sake, 
Horace- what are you going to do with this?’ 

Quinn took the picture from his hand. 

‘Horace, what ate you going to do with it?’ 

‘Bum it.’ The sheriff ruffied the edges of the envelopes with 
his thumb. ‘Here’s a deck of hell,’ he said. ‘These could tear the 
county to pieces.’ 

Quinn wrote a list of names on a sheet of paper. Then he 
hoisted himself up on his game leg . and went to the iron 
stove against the north wall of his office. He crunched up the 
Salmas Morning Journal and lighted it and dropped it in the 
stove, and when it flared up he dropped the manila envelopes 
on the flame, set the damper, and closed the stove. The fire, 
roared and the flames winked yellow beliind the little isinglass 
windows in the front of tire stove. Quinn bmshed his hands 
together as though they were dirt^'. ‘The negatives were , in' 
there,’ he said. ‘I’ve been through her desk. There weren’t any 
other prints.’ 

His visitor tried to speak but his voice was a husky whisper. 
¦‘Thank you, Horace.’ 

The sheriff limped to his desk and picked up his list. ‘I uunt. 
you to do something for me. Here's a list. Tell everyone on this 
list I’ve burned the pictures. You know them all, God knows. 
And they could take it from you. Nobody’s holy. Get each man 
alone and tell him exactly what happened. Look here!’ He 

526 , 



opened the stove door and poked the black sheets until they 
were reduced to powder. 'TeU them that/ he said. 

His visitor looked at the sheriff, and Quinn knew that there 
was no power on earth that could keep this man from hating 
him. For the rest of their lives there would be a barrier between 
them, and neither one could ever admit it. 

' ‘Horace, I don’t know how to thank you/ 

¦ And the sheriff said in sorrow, ‘That’s aU right. It’s what I’d 
want my friends to do for me,’ _ ¦ 

‘The goddam bitch/ his visitor said softly, and Horace Quinn 
knew that part of the curse was for him. 

And he knew he wouldn’t be sheriff much longer. These 
guilt-feeling men could get him out, and they would have to. He 
sighed and sat down. ‘Go to your lunch now,’ he said. ‘I’ve got 
work to do.’ 

At quarter to one Sheriff Quinn turned off Main Street on 
Central Avenue. At Reynaud’s Bakery he bought a loaf of French 
bread, still warm and giving off its wonderful smell of fer- 
mented dough. 

He used the hand-rail to help himself up the steps of the 
Trask porch. 

Lee answered the door, a dish-towel tied around lus middle, 
‘He’s not home/ he said. 

‘Well, he’s on his way. I called the draft board. I’ll wait for 
him.’ 

Lee moved aside and let him in and seated him in the living- 
room. ‘You like a nice cup of hot coffee?’ he asked. 

‘I don’t mind if I do.’ 

‘Fresh made/ said Lee, and v/ent into the kitchen, 

Quinn looked around the comfortable sitting-room. He felt 
that he didn’t want his office much longer. He remembered hear- 
ing a doctor say, ‘I love to deliver a baby, because if I do mr 
work well, there’s joy at the end of it.’ The sheriff had though: 
often of that remark. It seemed to him that if he did his wori: 
well there was sorrow at the end of it for somebody. The fact 
that it was necessary was losing its weight with him. He wculd 
be retiring soon whether he wanted to or not. 

Every man has a retirement picture in v/hich he does those 
things he never had time to do — makes tlie journeys, r^cs thr 
neglected. books he always pretended to have read. For many 
years the sheriff dreamed of spending the shining time 
and fishing — wandering in the Santa Lucia range, campmi; b' 
half-remembered streams. And now tliat it was almost timr 3v 

527 



Adam read the . two lines and went right on staring at the 
paper and beyond it. ‘He doesn’t know -she is his mother.’ 

‘You never told him?’ . ' 

‘No.’ ' ' • . . ¦ . ¦ ¦ 

‘Jesus Christ ! ’ said the slieriff.’ 

Adam said earnestlj’, ‘I’m sure he wouldn’t want anything bf 
hers. Let’s just tear it up and forget it. If he knew, I don’t think 
Aron would want anjT;hmg of hers.’ . _ 

‘ ’Fraid j^ou can’t,’ Quinn said. ‘We do quite a few illegal 
things. She had a safe-deposit box. I don’t Itave to tell you where 
I got the will or the key.'L went to the bank. Didn’t wait for a 
court order. Thought it might have a bearing.’ He didn’t tell 
Adam he thought there might be more pictures. ‘Well, Old Fob 
let ihe open the box. We can always deny it. There’s over, a 
hundred thousand dollars in gold certificates. There’s'money in 
there in bales -and there isn’t one goddam thing in. there but 
money.’ 

‘Nothing?’ . , ‘ . 

' ‘One other thing- a marriage certificate.’ 

Adam leaned back in his chair. The remoteness was coming 
dowm again, the soft protective folds between hinascif and the 
world. He saw his coffee and took a sip of it. .‘What do you 
think I ought to do?* he asked steadily and quietly. 

‘I can only tell you what I’d do,’ Sheriff Quinn said. Tou 
don’t have to take my advice. Td have tlie boy in right now. I’d 
tell him everything -every single thing. I’d even tell him why 
you didn’t tell him before. He’s - how old ?’ 

‘Seventeen.’ 

‘He’s a man. He’s got to take it some time. Better if he gets 
the whole thing at once.’ 

‘Cal knows,’ said Adam. ‘I wonder why she made the will to 
Aron,’ ' 

‘God knows. Well, what do you think ? ’ 

‘I don’t know, and so I’m going to do what you say. Will you 
stay with me?’ 

‘Sure I will.’ s. 

‘Lee,’ Adam called, ‘tell Aron I want him. He has come home, 
hasn’t he?’ 

Lee came to the doorway. His heat'y lids closed for a moment 
and then opened. ‘Not yet. Maybe he went back to school.’ 

‘He would have told me. You know, Horace, we drank a lot of 
champagne on Thanksgiving. Where’s Cal?’ 

‘In his room,’ said Lee. 


530 



¦ ‘Well, call him in. Get him in. Cal will know.’ 

Cal’s face w'as tired and his shoulders sagged with exhaustion, 
but his face was pinched and closed and crafty and mean. ¦ 

Adam asked, ‘Do you know where your brother is?’ 

‘No, I don’t,’ said Cal. 

‘Weren’t you with him at all?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘He hasn’t been home for two nights. Where is he?’ 

‘How do I know?’ said Cal. ‘Am I supposed to look after 

him?’ .... 

Adam’s head sank down, his body jarred, just a little quiver. 
At the back of his eyes a tiny sharp incredibly bright blue light 
flashed. He said thickly, ‘Maybe he did go back to college.’ His 
lips seemed heavy and he murmured like a man talking in his - 
sleep. ‘Don’t you think he went back to college?’ 

' Sheriff Quinn stood up. ‘Anjnhing I got to do I can do later. 
You get a rest, Adam. You’ve had a shock.’ 

Adam looked up at him. ‘Shock -oh, yes. Thank you, George. 
Thank you very much.’ 

. ‘George?’ 

‘Thank you very much,’ said Adam. 

When the sheriff had gone, ,Cal went to his room. Adam 
leaned back in his chair, and very soon he went to sleep and'his 
mouth dropped open and he snored across his palate. 

Lee watched him for a while before he went back to his Idt- 
chen. He lifted the bread-box and took out a tiny volume bound 
• in leather, and the gold tooling was almost completely worn 
smay-The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius in English trans- 
lation. 

Lee wiped his steel-rimmed spectacles on a dish-towel. He 
opened the book and leafed through. And he smiled to himself, 
consciously searching for reassurance. 

He read slowly, moving his lips over the words. ‘Everything 
is only for a day, both that which remembers and that which is 
remembered. 


Observe constantly that all things take place by change, and 
accustom thyself to consider that the nature of the universe loves 
nothing so much as to change things which are'^nd to make 
new things like them. For everything that exists is in a manner 
the seed of that which will be.’ • 


Lee glanced down the page. ‘Thou wilt die soon and thou art 
not yet simple nor free from perturbations, nor without suspi- 
aon of being hurt by external Aings, nor kindly disposed to- 


531 




knocked me down and ran away. Our dear mother killed her- 
self; my 'father -he’s -there’s something wrong with him. Now 
you know about me. Now you have some reason to walk away 
•from me.’ 

‘Now I know about him/ she said calmly. 

‘My brother?’ 

‘YeSj your brother.’ 

‘He was good. Why did I say tvas? He is good. He’s not mean 
or dirty like me.’ 

They had been walking very slowly. Abra stopped and Cal 
stopped and she faced him. 

'Cal/ she said, 'I’ve known about your mother for a long, 
long time.’ 

•You have?’ 

‘I heard my parents talking when they thought I was asleep. 

I want to tell you something, and it’s hard to tell and it’s good 
to tell.’ 

‘You want to?’ 

. ‘I have to. It’s not so terribly long ago that I grew up and I • 
wasn’t a little girl any more. Do you know what I mean?' 

‘Yes/ said Cal. 

‘You sure you know?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘All right, then. It’s hard to say now. I wish I’d said it then. 

I didn’t love Aron any more.’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘I’ve tried to figure it out. When we were children we lived in 
¦ a storj’’ that we made up. But when I grew up the story wasn’t 
enough. I had to have something else, because the story wasn’t 
true any more.’ 

‘Well — ’ 

‘Wait -let me get it all out. Aron didn’t grow up. Maybe he 
never will. He wanted the story and he wanted it to come out 
His way. He couldn’t stand to have it come out any other way.’ 

‘How about you?’ 

‘I don’t want to know how it comes out. I only want to be 
there while it’s going on. And, Cal -we were kind of strangers. 
We kept it going because we were used to it. But I didn’t belic\'C 
the story any more.’ 

‘How about Aron?’ 

‘He was going to have it come out his way if he had 
the world up by the roots.’ 

Cal stood looking at the ground. 

543 



Abra said, -Do you believe me?' . . 

Tm trying to study it out.’ , ' 

‘When you’re a child you’re the' centre of every thing.. Everj’-' 
thing, happens to you; Other people? They’re only ghosts fur- . 
nisbed, for yoii to talk to. But when you grow up you take your ¦ 
place and you’re your own size and shape. Things go out of you ' 
to others and come in from other, people; It’s worse, but.h's;; 
much better too. I’m glad you told me about Aron.’ , 

¦ ‘Why?’ '¦ 

‘Because now I know I didn’t make it all up; He couldii’t 
stand to know about his mother because that’s not how he , 
wanted the story to go - and he wouldn’t have any other story. 
So he tore up the world. It’s the same way he tore me up - Abra .. 
-when he wanted to be a priest.’ . : 

Cal said, ‘I’ll have to think.’ 

‘Give me my books,’ she said.- ‘Tell Lee I’ll come. I f^. free . . 
now. I want to think too. I think I love you, Cal.’ 

‘I’m not good.’ 

‘Because you’re not good.’ 

Cal walked quickly home. ‘She’ll come tomorrow,’- he told 
Lee. 

‘Why, you’re excited,’ said Lee. 

IV 

Once in the house Abra walked on her toes. In the hall she 
moved close to the wall where the floor did not creak. She put 
her foot on the lowest step on the carpeted stairs, clianged her 
mind, and went to the kitchen. 

‘Here you are,’ her mother said. ‘You didn’t come straight 
home.’ , ' . 

‘I had to stay after class. Is Father better?’ 

‘I guess so.’ . . 

‘What does the doctor say?’ 

‘Same thing as he said at first - overrvork. just needs a 
rest.’ 

‘He hasn’t seemed tired,’ said Abra. 

Her mother opened a bin and took out tliree baking potatoes , 
and carried them to the sink. ‘Your Father’s very brave, dear. I , 
should have known. He’s been doing so much srar work on top , 
of his own work. The doctor says sometimes a man collapses all 
at once'. ¦ 

‘Shall I go in and see him?’ 


544 




opened the incinerator end of the gas stove, put in the letters,; 
.and lighted thOT. . ' ' ; 

' Her mother came back, saying, ‘I smell fire.’ ' ' 

‘I lit the trash. lt was full.’ 

‘I wish you’d ask me when you want to do a thing like' that,’ 
her mother said. ‘I was saving the trash to warm the .kitchen in . 
the morning.’ 

.Tm sorry. Mother,’ Abra said. ‘I didn’t think,’ . ' 

‘You should try to think of these things. It seems to me . 
you’re getting very thoughtless lately.' - _ , 

‘I’m sorry. Mother.’ 

‘Saved is earned,’ said her mother. 

The telephone rang in the dining-room. Her mother went to 
answer it. Abra heard her -mother say, ‘No, you can’t sre him. 

It’s doctor’s orders. He can’t see anyone -no, not anyone.’ 

She came back to the kitchen. ‘Judge Knudsen again,’ she ¦ 
said. ¦ , 


CHAPTER 53, 

All during school ne,\-t day Abra felt good about going to 
sec Lee. She met Cal in the hall between classes. ‘Did you tell 
him I was coming?’ 

‘He’s started some kind of tarts,’ said Cal. He was dressed in 
his uniform - choking high collar, ill-fitting tunic, and wrapped 
leggings. 

‘You’ve got drill,’ Abra said. T’ll get there first. What kind of 
tarts?’ 

‘I don’t know. But leave me a couple, will you? Smelled like 
strawberry. Just leave me two.’ 

‘Want to see a present I got for Lee? Look!’ She opened a 
little cardboard box. ‘It’s a new kind of potato peeler. Takes off 
just the skin. It’s easy. I got it for Lee.’ 

‘There go my tarts,’ said Cal, and then, ‘If I’m a little late, 
don’t go before I get there, will you?’ 

‘Would you like to carry my books home?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Cal. 

She looked at him long, full in the eyes, until he wanted to 
drop his gaze, and then she walked away towards her class. , 

; 546 



. They walked along in silence while he tried to rebalance him- 
self. The wind w'as cold, and they quickened their steps to keep 
warm. They passed the last street-light on the very edge of 
Salinas, and blackness lay ahead of them and the road was un- 
paved and sticky with black ’dobe mud. 

They had come to the end of the pavement, to the end of the 
street-lights. The road under their feet was slippery witli spring 
mud, and the grass that brushed against their legs was wet with 
dew. 

Abra asked, ‘Where are we going?’ 

‘I wanted to run away; from my father’s eyes. They’re right in 
front of me all the time. When I close my eyes I still see them. 
I’ll always see them. My father is going to die, but his eyes will 
still be looking at me, telling me I killed my brother.’ 

‘You didn’t.’ 

‘Yes, I did. And his eyes say I did.’ 

‘Don’t talk like that. Where are we going?’ 

‘A little farther. There’s a ditch and a pump house - and a 
willow tree. Do you remember the willow tree? ’ 

‘I remember it.’ 

He said, ‘The branches come down like a tent and their tips 
touch the ground.’ 

‘I Imow.’ 

‘In the afternoons - the sunny afternoons - you and Aron 
would part the branches and go inside - and no one could see 



Lee set the percolator on the gas jet. He came to the table and 
said,‘Cal!’ . 

¦ ‘\Vhat do you v/ant?’ , 

. ' ‘Go to Abra.’ ' > . •- 

II - . ¦ - ' 

Cal stood on the neat porch and kept his finger on the hell until 
the harsh overlight flashed on and the night bolt rasped and Mrs . 
Bacon looked out. ‘I want to see Abra/. Cal said.- . 

Her mouth dropped open in amazement; 'You want what?’ V 
‘I want to see Abra/ 

‘You can’t. Abra’s gone to her room. Go away/ 

. Cal shouted, ‘I tell you I want to see Abra.’ ,• 

. ‘You go away or I’ll call the police.’, 

Mr Bacon called, ‘What is it? Who is it?’ 

‘Never you mind -go back to bed. You aren’t well. I’ll handle 
this.’ 

She mrned back to Cal. ‘Now- you get off the porch. And if 
you ring the bell again I’U phone the police. Now, get!’ The 
door slammed, the bolt scraped, and the hard overlight went 
off. 

Cal stood smiling in the dark, for he thought of, Tom Meek- 
lumbering up, saying, ‘Hello, Cal. What you up to?’ . - 
Mrs Bacon shouted from inside, ‘I see you. Now go on! Get, 
off the porch ! ’ 

He walked slowly down the -walk and turned towards home, 
and he hadn’t gone a block before Abra caught up with him. 
She was panting from her run. ‘Got out the back way/ she 
said. •' , . 

‘They’ll find you gone.’ 

'I don’t care.’ 

V ‘You don’t?’ 

'i!^o.’ , ¦, ',/¦ 

'^"1 said, ‘Abra, I’ve killed my brother and my father is para- 
because of me.’ 

She took his arm and clung to it with both hands. \ 

Cal said, ‘Didn’t you hear me?’ 

‘I heard you.’ , • 

‘Abra, my mother was a whore.’ 

‘I know. You told me. My father was a thief.’ 

,, Tve got her blood, Abra. Don’t you understand?’ 

¦ Tve got his/ she said. 


562 




, The blue wide eyes looked for tlie voice and finally found. 
Lee’s bro\vn and shining eyes. ' . 

Lee said, ‘Adam, I don’t know what you can hear or under- 
stand. When you had the numbness in 5'our hand and your 
eyes refused to read, I found out everything I could. But some' 
things no one but you can know. You may, behind }’our,eycs, 
be alert and . keen, or you, may be. living m a confused grej’ 
dream. You may, like a newborn cliild, perceive only light and 
moi'ement. - ¦ . . , 

‘There’s damage in your brain, and it may be tliat you. are a 
nciv thing in the world. Your Idndness may be meanness now, 
and your bleak honesty frctfid and conniving. No one knows, 
these things except you, Adam! Can you hear me?’ 

The blue eyes wavered, closed slowly, then opened. 

Lee said, ‘Thank you, Adam. I know how hard it is. I’m 
going to ask you to do a much harder thing. Here is your son - 
Caleb — your only son. Look at him, Adam I ’ 

The pale eyes looked until they found Cal. Cal’s mouth moved 
dryly and made no sound. 

Lee’s voice cut in, ‘I don’t knov.‘ how long you will live, 
Adam. Maybe a long time. Maybe an hour. But your son .tvill 
live. He will marry and his chDdren will be the only remnant 
left of you.’ Lee wiped his eyes with his fingers. 

‘He did a thing in anger, Adam, because he thought you had 
rejected him. The result of his anger is that his brother and 
your son is dead.’ 

Cal said, ‘Lee -you can’t.’ 

‘I have to,’ said Lee. ‘If it kills him I have to. I have the 
choice,’ and he smiled sadly and quoted, ‘ "If there’s blame, it’s 
my blame.’” Lee’s shoulders straightened. He said sharply, 
‘Your son is marked with guilt out of himself - out of himself - 
almost more than he can bear. Don’t crush him with rejection. 

, Don’t crush him, Adam.’ 

Lees breath whistled in his throat. ‘Adam, give him yoiir. 
blessing. Don’t leave him alone with his guilt. Adam, can you, 
hear me? Give him your blessing!’ 

A terrible brightness shone in Adam’s eyes and he closed 
them and kept tliem closed. A wrinkle formed between his 
brows. 

Lee said, ‘Help him, Adam -help him. Give him his chance. 
Let him be free. That’s all a man lias over the beasts. .Free 
him! Bless him!’ 

• The whole bed seemed to shake under the concentration. 



Adam’s breath came quick with his effort and then, slowly, his 
right hand lifted - lifted an inch and then fell back. 

Lee’s face was haggard. He mo%’cd to the head of the bed and 
wiped the sick man’s damp face with the edge of the sheet. He 
looked down at the closed cj-es. Lee whispered, ‘Thanl; you, 
Adam -thank you, my friend. Can you move your lips? Alake 
your lips form his name.’ 

Adam looked up with sick weariness. His . lips parted and 
failed and tried again. Then his lungs filled. He expelled the air 
and his lips combed the rushing sigh. His w'hispered word 
seemed to hang in the air. 

‘Timsheir 


. His eyes closed and he slept.